


Public Consultation

on the review of the EU copyright rules

Contents

I.  Introduction  2

A.  Context of the consultation  2

B.  How to submit replies to this questionnaire  3

C.  Confidentiality  3

II.  Rights and the functioning of the Single Market  7

A.  Why is it not possible to access many online content
services from anywhere in Europe?  7

B.  Is there a need for more clarity as regards the scope of
what needs to be authorised (or not) in digital transmissions?
10

1.  The act of “making available”  10

2.  Two rights involved in a single act of exploitation  11

3.  Linking and browsing  12

4.  Download to own digital content  13

C.  Registration of works and other subject matter – is it a
good idea?  14

D.  How to improve the use and interoperability of identifiers
15

E.  Term of protection – is it appropriate?  15

III.  Limitations and exceptions in the Single Market  16

A.  Access to content in libraries and archives  19

1.  Preservation and archiving  19

2.  Off-premises access to library collections  20

3.  E – lending  21

4.  Mass digitisation  22

B.  Teaching  23

C.  Research  25

D.  Disabilities  25

E.  Text and data mining  27

F.  User-generated content  28

IV.  Private copying and reprography  31

V.  Fair remuneration of authors and performers  33

VI.  Respect for rights  34

VII.  A single EU Copyright Title  36

VIII.  Other issues  36

Introduction

Context of the consultation

Over the last two decades, digital technology and the
Internethavereshaped the ways in which content is created,
distributed, and accessed.New opportunities have materialised
for those that create and produce content (e.g. a film, a
novel, a song),for new and existingdistribution platforms,for
institutions such as libraries, for activities such as research
and for citizens who now expect to be able to access content –
for information, education or entertainment purposes–regardless
of geographical borders.

This new environmentalso presentschallenges.One of themis for
the market tocontinue toadapt to new forms of distribution and
use.Another oneis for the legislator to ensure that the system
of rights, limitations to rights and enforcement
remainsappropriateand is adapted to the new environment.This
consultation focuses on the second of these challenges:
ensuring that the EU copyright regulatory frameworkstays fit
for purpose in the digital environmentto support creation and
innovation, tap the full potential of the Single
Market,fostergrowth andinvestment in our economy
andpromotecultural diversity.

In its"Communication on Content in the Digital Single Market"1

COM (2012)789 final, 18/12/2012.

the Commission set out two parallel tracks of action:ontheone
hand, to complete its on-going effort to review and to
modernise the EU copyright legislative framework2

As announced in the Intellectual Property Strategy ' A single
market for Intellectual Property Rights: COM (2011)287 final,
24/05/2011.

3

"Based on market studies and impact assessment and legal
drafting work"as announced in the Communication (2012)789.

with a view to a decision in 2014 on whether to table
legislative reform proposals, andon the other, to facilitate
practical industry-led solutions through the stakeholder
dialogue"Licences for Europe"on issues on which rapid progress
was deemed necessary and possible.

The"Licences for Europe"process has been finalised now4

See the document “Licences for Europe – tem pledges to bring
more content
online”:http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/copyright/docs/licences-for-europe/131113_ten-pledges_en.pdf.

. The Commission welcomes the practical solutions stakeholders
have put forward in thiscontext and will monitor their
progress. Pledges have been made by stakeholders in all four
Working Groups (cross borderportability ofservices,
user-generated content,audiovisual andfilm heritageand text and
data mining). Taken together, the Commission expects these
pledgesto bea further step in making the user environment
easier in many different situations. The Commission also takes
note of the fact that two groups –user-generated content
andtext and data mining–did not reach consensus among
participating stakeholders on either the problems to be
addressed or on the results. Thediscussions andresults
of"Licences for Europe"will be also taken into account in the
context of the review of the legislative framework.

As part of thereview process, the Commission is now launching a
public consultation onissuesidentified in the Communication on
Content in the Digital Single Market, i.e.:"territoriality in
the Internal Market, harmonisation, limitations and exceptions
to copyright in the digital age; fragmentation of the EU
copyright market; and how to improve the effectiveness and
efficiency of enforcement while underpinning its legitimacy in
the wider context of copyright reform".As highlighted in the
October 2013 European CouncilConclusions5

EUCO 169/13, 24/25 October 2013.

"Providingdigital services andcontentacross the single market
requires the establishment of a copyright regime for the
digital age. The Commission will therefore complete its
on-going review of the EU copyright framework in spring 2014.
It is important to modernise Europe's copyright regime and
facilitate licensing, while ensuring a high level protection of
intellectual property rights and taking into account
culturaldiversity".

This consultationbuildson previous consultationsand public
hearings, in particularthose onthe"Green Paper on copyright in
the knowledge economy"6

COM(2008)
466/3,http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/copyright/copyright-infso/index_en.htm#maincontentSec2.

,the"Green Paper on the online distribution of audiovisual
works"7

COM(2011) 427
final,http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/consultations/2011/audiovisual_en.htm.

and"Content Online"8

http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/consultations/2009/content_online_en.htm.

. These consultationsprovidedvaluablefeedback from
stakeholderson a number of questions,on issues as diverse as
theterritorialityofcopyrightand possible ways to overcome
territoriality,exceptionsrelated to the online dissemination of
knowledge,and rightholders’remuneration, particularly in the
audiovisual sector.Views were expressed by stakeholders
representing all stages in the value chain, including right
holders, distributors, consumers, and academics. The questions
elicited widely diverging views on the best way to proceed.
The"Green Paper on Copyright in the Knowledge Economy"was
followed up by a Communication. The replies to the"Green Paper
on the online distribution of audiovisual works"have fed into
subsequent discussions on the Collective Rights Management
Directive and into the current review process.

How tosubmitreplies tothis questionnaire

You are kindly asked to send your repliesby5February2014inaMS
Word, PDForOpenDocumentformattothefollowinge-mailaddressof DG
Internal Market and
Services:markt-copyright-consultation@ec.europa.eu.Please note
that replies sentafterthat datewill not be taken into account.

This consultation is addressedto different categories of
stakeholders. To the extent possible, the questions indicate
the category/iesof respondents mostlikelyto be concernedby
them(annotation in brackets, before the actual question).
Respondentsshould nevertheless feel freeto reply to any/all of
the questions. Also, please note that,apart from the question
concerning the identification of the respondent, none of the
questions is obligatory.Replies containing answers only to part
of the questions will be also accepted.

You are requested toprovideyour answers
directlywithinthisconsultation document. For the“Yes/No/No
opinion”questionsplease put the selected answer
inboldandunderlineit so it is easy for us to see your
selection.

In your answers to the questions, you are invited to refer to
the situation in EUMember States.You are also invitedin
particularto indicate, where relevant, what would be the
impactof options you put forwardin terms of costs,
opportunities and revenues.

The public consultation is available in English.
Responsesmay,however,be sent in any of the 24officiallanguages
of the EU.

Confidentiality

The contributionsreceivedin this round of consultation as well
as asummary reportpresenting theresponsesin a statistical and
aggregated formwill be published on the website of DG MARKT.

Please note thatallcontributionsreceivedwill be
publishedtogether with the identity of the contributor, unless
the contributor objects tothepublication oftheirpersonal data
on the grounds that such publication would harm his or her
legitimate interests. In this case,the contributionwillbe
published in anonymous form upon the contributor's explicit
request. Otherwise the contribution will not be published nor
willits content bereflected in the summary report.

Pleaseread ourPrivacy statement.

Please identify yourself:

Name:

UNIVERSIDAD CEU CARDENAL HERRERA

In the interests of transparency, organisations (including, for
example, NGOs, trade associations and commercial enterprises)
are invited to provide the public with relevant information
about themselves by registering in the Interest Representative
Register and subscribing to its Code of Conduct.

If you are a Registered organisation, please indicate your
Register ID number below. Your contribution will then be
considered as representing the views of your organisation.

…………………………………………………………………………………………………..

…………………………………………………………………………………………………..

If your organisation is not registered, you have the opportunity
toregister now.Responses from organisations not registered will
be published separately.

If you would like to submit your reply on an anonymous basis
pleaseindicate it belowby underlining thefollowinganswer:

Yes, I would like to submit my reply on an anonymous basis

Type of respondent(Pleaseunderlinethe appropriate):

End user/consumer(e.g.internet user,reader, subscriberto musicor
audiovisualservice,
researcher,student)ORRepresentativeofendusers/consumers

for the purposes of this questionnaire normally referred to
in questions as"end users/consumers"

X   Institutional user(e.g. school,university,
researchcentre,library, archive)OR

Representativeof institutional users

for the purposes of this questionnaire normally referred to
in questions as"institutional users"

Author/PerformerORRepresentativeof authors/performers

Publisher/Producer/BroadcasterORRepresentative of
publishers/producers/broadcasters

the two above categoriesare,for the purposes of this
questionnaire, normally referred to in questions as"right
holders"

Intermediary/Distributor/Other service provider(e.g.online music
or audiovisual service, games platform,social media, search
engine, ICT industry)ORRepresentative of
intermediaries/distributors/other service providers

for the purposes of this questionnaire normally referred to
in questionsas"service providers"

Collective Management Organisation

Public authority

Member State

Other(Please explain):

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Rights and the functioning of the Single Market

Why is it not possible to accessmanyonline content servicesfrom
anywhere in Europe?[Theterritorialscope of the rights involved
in digital transmissions and the segmentation of the market
through licensing agreements]

Holders of copyright and related rights –e.g. writers, singers,
musicians-do not enjoya singleprotection in the EU. Instead,
they are protected on the basis of a bundle of national rights
in each Member State. Those rights have been largely harmonised
by the existingEUDirectives. However,differences remain andthe
geographical scopeof the rightsis limited to the territory of
the Member State granting them.Copyright is thus territorial in
the sense that rights are acquired and enforced on a
country-by-country basis under national law9

This principle has been confirmed by the Court of justice on
several occasions.

.

The dissemination of copyright-protected content on the Internet
–e.g. by a music streaming service,orbyanonline e-book
seller–thereforerequires, in principle,an authorisation for
each national territory in which the content is communicatedto
the public. Rightholdersare, of course,in a position togranta
multi-territorial or pan-Europeanlicence, such thatcontent
services can be provided in several Member States and across
borders.A number of stepshave beentaken at EU level to
facilitate multi-territoriallicences: the proposal for a
Directive on Collective Rights Management10

Proposalfor a Directiveof the European Parliament and of the
Councilof 11 July 2012 on collective management of copyright
and related rights and multi-territorial licensing of rights in
musical works for online uses in the internal market, COM(2012)
372 final.

should significantly facilitate the delivery of
multi-territorial licences in musical worksfor online
services11

CollectiveManagementOrganisations play a significant role inthe
management of online rights for musical works in contrastto
thesituation where online rights are licenseddirectly by right
holders such asfilm or record producers or by newspaper or book
publishers.

;thestructured stakeholder dialogue “Licences for Europe”12

You can find more information on the following website:
http://ec.europa.eu/licences-for-europe-dialogue/.

and market-led developments such as the on-going work in the
Linked Content Coalition13

You can find more information on the following
website:http://www.linkedcontentcoalition.org/.

.

"Licences for Europe" addressed in particular the specific issue
of cross-border portability, i.e. the ability of consumers
having subscribed to online services in their Member State to
keep accessing them when travelling temporarily to other Member
States. As a result, representatives of the audio-visual sector
issued a joint statement affirming their commitment to continue
working towards the further development of cross-border
portability14

See the document “Licences for Europe – tem pledges to bring
more content
online”:http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/copyright/docs/licences-for-europe/131113_ten-pledges_en.pdf.

.

Despite progress, there are continued problems
withthecross-borderprovisionof, and access to, services. These
problems are most obviousto consumerswanting to access
servicesthatare madeavailable in Member Statesother than the
one in which they live.Not all online services are available in
all Member States and consumers face problems when trying
to access such services across borders. In some instances,
even if the“same”service is available in all Member States,
consumerscannotaccess theservice across borders (they can
onlyaccess their“national” service, and if they try to
accessthe "same" servicein another Member State they are
redirected to theonedesignatedfortheir country of residence).

Thissituationmayin part stem from the territoriality of
rightsand difficulties associated with the clearing of rights
in different territories.Contractual clauses in licensing
agreements between rightholders and distributors and/or between
distributors and end users mayalsobe at the origin of some of
the problems (denial of access, redirection).

The main issueat stake hereis,therefore,whether furthermeasures
(legislative or non-legislative, including market-led
solutions)need tobe taken at EU level in the medium term15

For possible long term measures such as the establishment of
aEuropean Copyright Code(establishinga single title) see
section VII of this consultation document.

to increase the cross-border availability of content services in
the Single Market,while ensuring an adequate level of
protectionfor right holders.

[In particular if you arean enduser/consumer:]Have you faced
problems whentryingto access online services in an EU Member
State other than the one in which you live?

YES - Please provide examples indicating the Member State,
the sector and the type of content concerned (e.g. premium
content such as certain films and TV series, audio-visual
content in general, music, e-books, magazines, journals and
newspapers, games, applications and other software)

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO

NO OPINION

[In particular if you area service provider:]Have you faced
problems when seeking to provide online services across
bordersin the EU?

YES - Please explain whether such problems, in your
experience, are related to copyright or to other issues (e.g.
business decisions relating to the cost of providing services
across borders, compliance with other laws such as consumer
protection)? Please provide examples indicating the Member
State, the sector and the type of content concerned (e.g.
premium content such as certain films and TV series,
audio-visual content in general, music, e-books, magazines,
journals and newspapers, games, applications and other
software).

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO

NO OPINION

[In particular if you area right holder or acollective
management organisation:]Howoftenare youaskedtogrant
multi-territorial licences?Pleaseindicate, if possible, the
number of requests per yearand provide examples indicating the
Member State, the sector and the type of content concerned.

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

If you have identified problems in the answers to any of the
questions above – what would be the bestway to tacklethem?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

[In particular if you area right holder or acollective
management organisation:]Are there reasons why, evenin cases
where you holdall thenecessaryrights forall theterritoriesin
question,youwould still find it necessaryor justifiedto impose
territorial restrictions onaservice provider (in order, for
instance, to ensure that access to certain content is not
possible in certainEuropeancountries)?

YES – Please explain by giving examples

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO

NO OPINION

[In particular if you aree.g. a broadcasterora service
provider:]Are there reasons why,evenin cases where you have
acquiredall thenecessaryrights for all the territoriesin
question,youwould still find it necessaryor justifiedto impose
territorial restrictions on the service recipient (in order for
instance, to redirect the consumer to a different website than
the one he is trying to access)?

 YES – Please explain by giving examples

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO

 NO OPINION

Do you think that further measures (legislative or
non-legislative, including market-led solutions) are needed at
EU level to increase the cross-border availability of content
services in the Single Market, while ensuring an adequate level
ofprotection for right holders?

YES– Please explain

There is a basic contradiction involving technological progress:
while technology eliminates barriers to the access of content,
the same access is prevented or hindered by aspects of the law
in each State.

A harmonization of limitations and exceptions would reduce
uncertainty for users and creators, especially in cross-border
situations where more than one law is applicable. What isneeded
is to prevent the creation and circulation of information from
being adversely affected by this uncertainty.

Is there a need for more clarityas regardsthe scope ofwhat needs
to be authorised (or not) in digital transmissions?[The
definition of the rightsinvolved in digital transmissions]

The EU framework for the protection of copyright and related
rights in the digital environment is largely established by
Directive 2001/29/EC16

Directive 2001/29/EC of the European Parliament and of the
Council of 22 May 2001 on the harmonisation of certain aspects
of copyright and related rights in the information society.

on the harmonisation of certain aspects of copyright and related
rights in the information society. OtherEUdirectives in this
fieldthatare relevant in the online environment are those
relating to the protection of software17

Directive 2009/24/EC of the European Parliament and of the
Council of 23 April 2009 on the legal protection of computer
programs.

and databases18

Directive 96/9/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council
of 11 March 1996 on the legal protection of databases.

.

Directive 2001/29/ECharmonisestherights of authors and
neighbouring rightholders19

Film and record producers, performers and broadcasters are
holders of so-called “neighbouring rights” in, respectively,
their films, records, performances and broadcast. Authors’
content protected by copyright is referred to as a “work” or
“works”, while content protected by neighbouring rights is
referred to as “other subject matter”.

which are essential for thetransmission of digital copiesof
works(e.g. an e-book)and other protected subject matter(e.g. a
record in a MP3 format)over the internetor similar digital
networks.

The mostrelevantrightsfor digital transmissionsarethe
reproduction right, i.e. the right to authorise or prohibit the
making of copies20

The right to “authorise or prohibit direct or indirect,
temporary or permanent reproduction by any means and in any
form, in whole or in part” (see Art. 2 of Directive 2001/29/EC)
although temporary acts of reproduction of a transient or
incidental nature are, under certain conditions, excluded (see
art. 5(1) of Directive 2001/29/EC).

,(notablyrelevant at the start of the transmission –e.g. the
uploading ofadigital copy of a work to a serverin view ofmaking
it available–and at the users’ end– e.g. when a user downloads
a digital copy of a work)and the communication to the
public/making available right, i.e. the rights to authorise or
prohibit the dissemination of the works in digital networks21

The right to authorise or prohibit any communication to the
public by wire or wireless means and to authorise or prohibit
the making available to the public “on demand” (seeArt. 3 of
Directive 2001/29/EC).

.These rightsare intrinsically linked in digital
transmissionsandboth need to be cleared.

Theact of“making available”

Directive 2001/29/EC specifiesneitherwhatis covered bythe making
available right(e.g. the upload,the accessibility by the
public,theactualreception by the public)norwherethe act of
“making available” takes place. This does not raise
questionsif the act is limited to a single territory.
Questionsarise however when the transmission covers several
territories and rights need to be cleared (does the act of
"making available" happeninthe country of the upload only?in
each of the countries where the content is potentially
accessible?in each of the countries where thecontent
iseffectivelyaccessed?).The most recent case law of the Court
of Justice of the European Union (CJEU)suggests that a relevant
criterion is the“targeting” of a certainMember State'spublic22

See in particularCase C-173/11(Football Dataco vs Sportradar)
andCase C-5/11 (Donner) for copyright and related rights, and
Case C-324/09 (L’Oréal vs eBay) for trademarks. With regard to
jurisdiction seealso joined Cases C-585/08 and C-144/09 (Pammer
and Hotel Alpenhof)andpending CaseC-441/13 (Pez Hejduk);
seehowever,adopting a different approach, CaseC-170/12
(Pinckney vs KDG Mediatech).

. According to this approachthecopyright-relevantact(whichhas
tobe licensed)occursat leastin those countries which are
“targeted” by the online service provider.A service provider
“targets” a group of customers residing in a specific country
when it directsits activity to that group, e.g. via
advertisement, promotions, a language or a currency
specifically targeted at that group.

Isthe scope of the“making available”right in cross-border
situations – i.e. when content is disseminated across borders
–sufficiently clear?

YES

NO–Pleaseexplain how this could be clarified and what
typeofclarification would be required(e.g.as in "targeting"
approach explained above,as in "country of origin"approach23

The objective of implementing a “country of origin”approachis to
localise the copyright relevant act that must be licenced in a
single Member State (the "country of origin", which could be
for example the Member State in whichthe content is uploaded or
wherethe service provider is established), regardless of in how
many Member States the work canbe accessed or received. Such an
approachhas already been introduced at EU level with regard to
broadcasting by satellite(seeDirective 93/83/EEC on the
coordination of certain rules concerning copyright and rights
related to copyright applicable to satellite broadcasting and
cable retransmission).

)

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO OPINION

[In particular if you are a right holder:]Coulda clarification
of the territorial scope of the“making available”right have
aneffect on therecognition of yourrights (e.g.whetheryou are
considered to be an author or not,whetheryou are considered to
have transferred your rights or not),onyourremuneration,
oronthe enforcement of rights(including the availability of
injunctive relief24

Injunctive relief is a temporary or permanent remedy allowing
the right holder to stop or prevent an infringement of his/her
right.

)?

YES –Please explain howsuchpotential effectscould beaddressed

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO

NO OPINION

Two rights involved in a single act of exploitation

Each act oftransmission in digital networks entails(in the
current state of technology and law) several reproductions.This
means that there are two rights that apply to digital
transmissions: the reproduction right and the making available
right. Thismay complicate the licensing of works for online
usenotably whenthetwo rights are held bydifferent
persons/entities.

[In particular if youa service provider or a right holder:]Does
the application of two rights toa single act of economic
exploitation in the online environment (e.g. a download)create
problemsfor you?

YES – Please explainwhat type of measureswould be needed in
order to address such problems (e.g. facilitation of joint
licences when the rights are in different hands,legislation to
achieve the "bundling of rights")

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO

NO OPINION

Linking and browsing

Hyperlinks are references to data that lead a user from one
location in the Internet to another. They are indispensable for
the functioning of the Internet as a network. Severalcasesare
pending before the CJEU25

Cases C-466/12 (Svensson), C-348/13 (Bestwater International)
and C-279/13 (C More entertainment).

in which the question has been raised whether the provision of
a clickable link constitutes an act of communication to the
public/making available to the public subject to the
authorisation of the rightholder.

A user browsing the internet (e.g. viewing a web-page) regularly
creates temporary copies of works and other subject-matter
protected under copyright on the screen and in the 'cache'
memory of his computer. A question has been referred to the
CJEU26

Case C-360/13 (Public Relations Consultants Association Ltd).See
alsohttp://www.supremecourt.gov.uk/decided-cases/docs/UKSC_2011_0202_PressSummary.pdf.

as towhether such copies are always covered by the mandatory
exception for temporary acts of reproduction provided for in
Article 5(1) of Directive 2001/29/EC.

Should the provision of a hyperlink leading to a work or other
subject matter protected under copyright,either in generalor
under specific circumstances,besubject to the authorisation of
the rightholder?

NO– Please explainwhether you consider this to be the case in
general,or under specific circumstances,and why(e.g. because it
does not amount to an act of communication to the public – or to
a new public, or because it should be covered by a copyright
exception)

Linking from one page to another is essential for the proper
functioning of the Internet and therefore should not be
considered an act of exploitation under copyright, but rather a
mere indication of content that is available on the Internet.
Those establishing the link are not introducing new content
(they neither reproduce it nor cause it to be made available)
but are merely citing it (indicating the source and the path
for accessing the content). This is an essential act that must
be freed from the need to request authorization. Otherwise it
would add yet another type of authorization (and possible need
for compensation?) to the already existing long list of
assumptions subject to authorization, and thus result in a
greater imbalance among the rights at stake.

An entirely different issue concerns the question of whoever
introduced the content on the network, whether or not this
person or entity has the necessary rights to do so and
therefore, whether or not permission should have been
requested.

Should the viewing of a web-pagewhere this impliesthetemporary
reproduction of a work or other subject matterprotected under
copyrighton the screen andin thecache memoryof the user’s
computer,either in general or under specific circumstances,be
subject to the authorisation of the rightholder?

NO– Please explainwhether you consider this to be the case in
general,or under specific circumstances,andwhy(e.g. because it
isor should be covered by a copyright exception)

Viewing a page is essential for understanding its content, and
therefore for allowing a user to assess its potential interest:
it is the equivalent of leafing through a document in the
analogue environment (even though this process, when done
digitally, requires the generation of temporary copies on
users’ computers or other devices); or of looking at a
product to evaluate it (legally consumers are assured of the
right to withdraw from a purchase if they are unable to have
prior access to the product, as may be the case with sales made
remotely).

If authorization were to be needed for viewing of a web-page to
a site, it would become yet another act of rights exploitation,
on top of the existing ones. Excessive protection of copyright
to allow for compensation related to the advantages of
accessing content digitally, would only serve to break the
intended balance between the different parties affected and
would become a means of limiting the basic rights of
individuals.

Download to own digital content

Digital content is increasinglybeing
boughtviadigitaltransmission(e.g. download to own). Questions
arise as to the possibility forusersto dispose of the filesthey
buy inthismanner(e.g. by selling themorby giving them as a
gift).Theprinciple of EU exhaustion of the distribution right
applies in the case of the distribution ofphysical copies (e.g.
when a tangible article such as a CD or a book, etc. is sold,
the right holder cannot preventthefurther distributionof that
tangible article)27

See also recital 28 of Directive 2001/29/EC.

. Theissuethat ariseshere is whether this principlecan also be
applied in the caseof an act of transmission equivalent in its
effect to distribution (i.e. where the buyer acquires the
property of the copy)28

In Case C-128/11 (Oracle vs. UsedSoft) the CJEU ruled that an
author cannot oppose the resale of a second-hand licence that
allows downloading his computer program from his website and
using it for an unlimited period of time. The exclusive right
of distribution of a copy of a computer program covered by such
a licence is exhausted on its first sale.While it is thus
admitted that the distribution right may be subject to
exhaustion in case of computer programs offered for download
with the right holder’s consent, the Court was careful to
emphasise that it reached this decision based on the Computer
Programs Directive. It was stressed that this exhaustion rule
constituted alex specialisin relation to the Information
Society Directive (UsedSoft, par. 51, 56).

.This raises difficultquestions, notably relating to the
practical application of such an approach (how to
avoidre-sellers keepingand usinga copy ofawork afterthey have
“re-sold” it– this is often referred to as the “forward and
delete” question) as well astotheeconomicimplications of the
creation of a second-hand market of copies of perfect quality
that never deteriorate(in contrast to the second-hand market
for physical goods).

[In particular if you arean enduser/consumer:]Haveyou
facedrestrictionswhen trying to reselldigital files that
youhavepurchased(e.g.mp3 file,e-book)?

YES–Please explainby giving examples

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO

NO OPINION

[In particular if you area right holderor a service provider:]
What would betheconsequencesofproviding a legal framework
enabling the resale ofpreviouslypurchaseddigital content?
Please specify per market(type of content)concerned.

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Registration of works andother subject matter – is it a good
idea?

Registration is not often discussed in copyrightin the EUas the
existing internationaltreaties in the area prohibit formalities
as a condition for theprotection and exerciseofrights.
However,this prohibition is not absolute29

For example, it does not affect “domestic” works – i.e.works
originating inthe country imposing the formalitiesas opposed to
works originating inanothercountry.

.Moreover a system of registration does not need to bemade
compulsory or constitute a precondition for the protection and
exercise of rights.Witha longer term ofprotectionand with the
increased opportunities that digital technology
providesfortheuse of content(includingolder works and works
thatotherwisewouldnot havebeen disseminated),the advantages and
disadvantages of a system of registrationare increasingly
beingconsidered30

On the basis of Article 3.6 of the Directive 2012/28/EU of the
European Parliament and of the Council of 25 October 2012 on
certain permitted uses of orphan works, a publicly accessible
online database is currently being set up by the Office
forHarmonisation of theInternalMarket (OHIM)for the
registration of orphan works.

.

Wouldthecreation ofa registration system at EU levelhelp in the
identification and licensing of works and other subject matter?

YES

What would bethe possible advantagesof such a system?

[Open question]

For libraries, such a system would facilitate copyright
management, especially if the record were to include all types
of works (regardless of the type of license associated with
them), for example, it would make digitization projects easier.
It would also help in the reuse of content available on the net
since it is not always clear whether such content is eligible
for copyright protection or who the intellectual property
holders are.

What would bethe possible disadvantagesof such a system?

[Open question]

In the event of registration being mandatory, there would be
more work involved for obtaining recognition of intellectual
property rights, which would surely increase the costs. And if
entries in the registry were not kept up to date, the system
would not be useful to users.

Whatincentives forregistrationbyrightholderscouldbe envisaged?

[Open question]

If registration were not mandatory, incentives could include,
for example in the academic sphere, a requirement for obtaining
some type of merit. Another example would be to have a qualified
standard of proof (as exists in Spain for someone who alleges
something against what has been recorded bears the burden of
proof). The registration process should be kept free and as
flexible as possible. It should also be required in order for
rights holders to collect their remunerations from the
societies managing their rights.

How to improve theuse andinteroperability ofidentifiers

There are many private databases ofworks and other subject
matterheld by producers, collective management organisations,
and institutions such aslibraries, which are based to a greater
or lesser extent on the use of(more or less)interoperable,
internationally agreed ‘identifiers’. Identifierscan be
compared to a reference number embedded in a work,are specific
to the sector in which they have been developed31

E.g. the International Standard Recording Code (ISRC) is used to
identify recordings, the International Standard Book Number
(ISBN) is used to identify books.

, and identify, variously, the work itself, the owner or the
contributor to a work or other subject matter.There are notable
examples of where industry is undertaking actions to improve the
interoperability of such identifiers and databases. The Global
Repertoire Database32

You will find more information about this initiative on the
following website:http://www.globalrepertoiredatabase.com/.

should, once operational,provide a single source of information
on the ownership and control of musical works worldwide. The
Linked Content Coalition33

You will find more information about this initiative(funded in
part by the European Commission)on the following website:
www.linkedcontentcoalition.org.

was established to develop building blocks for the expression
and management of rights and licensing across all content and
media types. It includes the development ofa Rights Reference
Model (RRM) – a comprehensive data model for all types of
rights in all types of content. The UK Copyright Hub34

You will find more information about this initiative on the
following website:http://www.copyrighthub.co.uk/.

is seeking to take such identification systems a step further,
and to create a linked platform, enabling automated licensing
across different sectors.

Whatshouldbethe role of theEUin promoting the adoption
of identifiers in the content sector, and in promoting the
development and interoperability of rights ownership and
permissions databases?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Term of protection– is it appropriate?

Works and other subject matter are protected under copyright for
a limited period of time. After the term of protection has
expired, a work falls into the public domain and can be freely
used by anyone (in accordance with the applicable national
rules on moral rights). The Berne Convention35

Berne Convention for the Protection of Literary and Artistic
Works,http://www.wipo.int/treaties/en/ip/berne/.

requiresa minimum term of protection of 50 years after the death
of the author.The EUrulesextend this term of protection to 70
years after the death of the author (as do many other
countries, e.g. the US).

With regard to performers in the music sector and phonogram
producers, theterm provided for in theEU rulesalsoextend20
years beyond what is mandated in international
agreements,providingfor a term of protection of 70 years after
the first publication. Performers and producers in the
audio-visual sector, however, do not benefit from such an
extended term of protection.

Arethe current terms ofcopyright protection still appropriate in
the digital environment?

NO– Please explain if they should be longer or shorter

The current system is very complex. Copyright in favor of the
heirs lasting for a period of 70 years after the author's death
results in orphan works as well as representing a burden for
rights management and therefore for accessing the material.
Additionally digitization projects particularly are made more
difficult. Excessive formalities or long periods of protection
do not fit well in the digital era, since they hinder
flexibility.

Managing orphan works, including the search and identification
of rights holders, is very costly for all sectors involved.
Furthermore, for libraries the existence and management of
orphan works represent a barrier to access for both users and
researchers.

The exemption period of 70 years beyond the author’s death
should be reduced, at the least, to 50 years as stipulated by
Berne. At the same time, we believe that the current approach
based on the Berne Convention could be revised, with the date
of publication of a work established as the criterion for
computing the point at which a work passes into public domain
(for example, a period of 90 years from the date publication
would surely cover the life of the author). It would also be
good if the law were to recognize an option that would allow
authors themselves or other holders of exploitation rights to
decide at what point to pass their works into the public
domain, even if the legally protected period had not elapsed.

We adhere, on this point at least, to the statement by La Ligue
des Bibliothèques Européennes de Recherche - Association of
European Research Libraries (LIBER):

Whilst acknowledging copyright’s social, economic and cultural
functions, we believe that the minimum terms of protection in
Europe (currently 70 years) should be reduced. They should be
brought in line with the minimum terms of protection set out in
the Berne Convention and the Agreement on Trade Related
Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS): life plus 50 years for
copyrighted works and 50 years for neighbouring rights. Longer
copyright terms exacerbate the issue of orphan works, which are
created when copyright owners cannot be found or identified.
Only a small percentage of copyright works created for
commercial gain retain ongoing value sufficient to justify long
copyright terms. The EU Directive on Orphan Works recognises the
significance of the orphan works problem and LIBER believes that
a reduced term of protection for copyright works would greatly
alleviate this issue. The need to carry out a diligent search
for owners of orphan works is putting too much strain on
library resources and is creating a cultural black hole as
‘orphaned’ content cannot be used by the public or
researchers.

Limitations and exceptions in the Single Market

Limitations and exceptions to copyright and related rights
enable the use of works and other protected
subject-matter,without obtaining authorisation from the
rightholders,for certain purposes and to a certain extent (for
instance the use for illustrationpurposesof an extract from a
novelby a teacher in a literature class). At EU level theyare
established in a number of copyright directives, most notably
Directive2001/29/EC36

Plus Directive 96/9/ECon the legal protection of
databases;Directive 2009/24/ECon the legal protection of
computer programs,and Directive 92/100/ECon rental right and
lending right.

.

Exceptions and limitations in the national and EU copyright laws
have to respect international law37

Article 9(2) of the Berne Convention for the Protection of
Literary and Artistic Works (1971); Article 13 of the TRIPS
Agreement (Trade Related Intellectual Property Rights) 1994;
Article 16(2) of the WIPO Performers and Phonograms Treaty
(1996); Article 9(2) of the WIPO Copyright Treaty (1996).

.In accordance with international obligations, the EU acquis
requires that limitations and exceptionscanonlybeapplied in
certain special cases which do not conflict with a normal
exploitation of the work or other subject matter and do not
unreasonably prejudice the legitimate interest of the
rightholders.

Whereas thecatalogueof limitations and exceptions included
inEUlawis exhaustive(no other exceptions can be applied to the
rights harmonised at EU level)38

Other than the grandfathering of the exceptions of minor
importance for analogue uses existing in Member States at the
time of adoption ofDirective 2001/29/EC(see, Art. 5(3)(o)).

, these limitations and exceptions areoftenoptional39

With the exception ofcertain limitations: (i)in the Computer
Programs Directive,(ii) in the Database Directive,(iii) Article
5(1) in theDirective 2001/29/ECand(iv) the OrphanWorksDirective.

,in the sense thatMember Statesare free to reflect in national
legislation as many or as few of them as they wish.Moreover,the
formulation of certain of the limitations andexceptionsis
general enough to give significantflexibility totheMember
States as to how,and to what extent,toimplement them (if they
decide to do so). Finally,it is worth noting that not all of
the limitationsand exceptionsincluded in the EUlegal framework
for copyrightare of equivalent significance in policy terms and
in terms of their potential effect on the functioning of the
Single Market.

Inaddition, inthe same manner that the definition of the rights
is territorial (i.e. has an effect only within the territory of
the Member State), the definition of the limitations and
exceptions to the rights is territorial too (so an act that is
covered by an exception in a Member State "A" may still require
the authorisation of the rightholder once we move to the Member
State "B")40

Only theexception established in therecent Orphan Works
Directive(a mandatory exceptionto copyright and related rights
in the case where the rightholders are not known or cannot be
located) has been givena cross-border effect, which means that,
for instance, once a literary work – for instance a novel – is
considered an orphan work in a Member State, that same
novelshall be considered an orphan work in all Member Statesand
can beused and accessed in all Member States.

.

The cross-bordereffectoflimitations andexceptionsalsoraises the
question of fair compensation of rightholders.In some
instances,Member States are obliged to compensate rightholders
for theharminflicted on them bya limitation orexceptionto their
rights. In other instancesMember Statesare not obliged, butmay
decide,to provide for such compensation.If a limitation or
exception triggering a mechanism of fair compensation were to
be given cross-border effect (e.g. the books are used for
illustration in an online course given by an university in
a Member State "A" and the students are in a Member State"B")
then there would also be a need to clarifywhich national law
shoulddeterminethe level of that compensation and who should
pay it.

Finally, the question of flexibility and adaptabilityis being
raised:what is the best mechanism to ensure that the EU and
Member States’ regulatory frameworks adapt when
necessary(either to clarify that certain uses are covered by an
exception or to confirm that for certain uses the authorisation
of rightholders is required)?The main question here is whether
a greaterdegree of flexibility can be introduced in the EU and
Member States regulatory framework while ensuringthe
requiredlegal certainty,including for the functioning of the
Single Market, and respecting the EU's international
obligations.

Are there problems arising from the fact that most limitations
and exceptions provided in the EUcopyrightdirectivesare
optionalfor the Member States?

YES– Please explain by referring to specific cases

This phenomenon leads to differences in treatment among the
States, and therefore it also creates problems in cases of
cross-border use. Libraries and educational institutions
provide open access over the Internet to teaching materials
which may include third party works, in accordance with the
quotation exception in their own given country.

However this exception is not defined in the same manner among
the different Member States; for example, it could be
problematic in cases of the inclusion of photographs or of
works of reduced length, such as poetry or songs.

A similar problem exists for the exception related to
illustration for teaching. Obviously this can have an impact on
courses being offered to a broad public over the Internet.
In the area of preservation, which is perhaps one of the most
harmonized, there nevertheless exist differences among the
various Member States regarding electronic documents.

Therefore, our answer is YES: problems do arise from the fact
that limitations and exceptions are optional rather than being
mandatory.

We adhere to the statement by LIBER:

There is to all intents and purposes no harmonisation in the EU
for users of copyright works in the single market. This makes
the cross-border use of copyright works problematic.

Should some/all of the exceptions be made mandatory and, if so,
is there aneed for a higher level of harmonisation of such
exceptions?

YES–Please explain byreferringto specific cases

In today’s globalized world, it is necessary for there to be
common exceptions among as many countries as possible. A
greater degree of copyright harmonization in Europe would
reduce legal barriers and, at the same time, would increase the
flexibility in accessing and using content. The examples of our
previous response show that there would be greater legal
certainty if the exception of quotation or of illustration for
teaching were common to all Member States and if a single
court, the ECJ, were able to offer all States a final, common
interpretation of the exceptions. Even the exception in favor
of preservation, which is among the most harmonized and is key
for ensuring the present and future access to the European
intellectual heritage, can be improved by having a common and
compulsory regulation for all Member States.

Harmonization is not an easy task but we believe that a maximum
number of common exceptions should be agreed upon among all the
States. Only in those cases in which an existing exception can
be justified by national interests should national exceptions
bemaintained.

We adhere to the statement by LIBER:

A harmonised approach to the adoption and implementation of
limitations and exceptions across Europe is required to reduce
legal uncertainty and to promote the circulation of knowledge
in the single market. All those that relate to education,
learning and access to knowledge should be mandatory. A
harmonised approach to the adoption and implementation of
limitations and exceptions across Europe is required to reduce
legal uncertainty and to promote the circulation of knowledge
in the single market.

Should any newlimitations andexceptions be added toor removed
fromthe existing catalogue?Please explain by referring to
specific cases.

[Open question]

No exceptions should be deleted. In some cases existing ones
could be improved upon and new ones could be introduced as
deemed necessary. Thus:

-It should be possible to make use of works protected by
intellectual property rights for what is referred to as "data
mining" for teaching, research purposes or information
retrieval by libraries or similar institutions.

-Any use deemed harmless or without economic significance to a
work’s rights holders should also be allowed.

-Exceptions to the right of transformation, currently not
recognized by the Directive, should be included. For example,
for enabling user generated content in cases such as home
videos where small fragments of songs or movies are reproduced;
or where manipulated fragments of films are disseminated
publicly on Internet platforms but with no commercial intent;
or in which videos are created by juxtaposing fragments of
works without commercial intent. Other examples requiring
exceptions to the right of transformation are for the use by
persons with disabilities and applications for teaching or
research purposes.

-A better definition is needed of the exception of illustration
for teaching, one that solely establishes the minimum and
essential requirements, namely: purpose of teaching, lack of
profit motive, fair use, with no remuneration or compensation,
and binding on the States, in order to prevent them from
restricting their conditions.

-In addition, a reformulation is needed of the exception on
communicating works held by libraries, museums, archives and
educational institutions and of providing access to them. This
exception is currently limited to purposes of research or
private study and requires that the works be consulted from
dedicated terminals on these institutions’ premises (Article
5.3.n Directive). The accumulation of requirements for this
exception makes it very difficult to find actual cases in
libraries in which this exception can be enjoyed.

We adhere to the statement by LIBER on this point:

No exceptions should be removed. New mandatory exceptions such
as:

-Text and data mining for all research purposes;

-An exception to ensure that nothing in a contract undermines
limitations and exceptions in copyright law;

-Legal certainty for e-lending by libraries analogous to
analogue e-lending;

-A new preservation exception allowing preservation networks
between institutions (currently most preservation exceptions
relate to preserving material in your own collection, rather
than having digital mirror sites and activities between
institutions);

-Publicly funded research results openly available regardless of
contracts signed with a publisher (1)

-Research exceptions making no distinction between commercial
and non-commercial purposes.

(1)By increasing accessibility and availability, and by
facilitating the use and reuse of content, open access will
play an integral role in driving research excellence globally.
Copyright law should not hinder its progress. An exception or
legal instrument should be developed which allows researchers
to make the results of publicly funded research available
openly, regardless of contracts signed with a publisher. Open
data is also an area of growth and potential driver of research
and innovation. It is important to ensure that legal
Intellectual Property instruments such as the Database
Directive do not conflict with the realisation of this
potential and negate the huge public investment in research
infrastructures to support reuse of this data.

Independently from the questions above, is there a need to
provide for agreaterdegree of flexibility in the EU regulatory
framework for limitations and exceptions?

YES– Please explain why

Technology is constantly evolving and creating new environments,
new uses and generating new needs. A closed catalog of
exceptions does not allow for adapting to new realities. Some
type of mechanism is needed to allow for the application of new
exceptions, even if they are not explicitly included in the
regulations.

We adhere to what LIBER has expressed:

Currently Europe has very tightly defined and prescriptive
exceptions. Additional flexibility, particularly given the slow
pace of legislative change as compared to rapid advancements in
technology, would be desirable.

If yes, what would be the best approach to provide for
flexibility? (e.g.interpretation by national courts and the
ECJ, periodic revisions of the directives, interpretations by
the Commission, built-in flexibility, e.g. in the form of a
fair-useor fair dealingprovision / open norm, etc.)?Please
explain indicating what would be the relative advantages and
disadvantages of such an approachas well asitspossible effects
on the functioning of the Internal Market.

[Open question]

The most flexible formula would be to include in the legal text
itself some sort of clause similar to "fair-use", a rule that
would define the criteria to be taken into account for a use to
be considered as an exception, despite it not being expressly
stated in the rule. In the case of limitations, they are not
interpreted so as to unreasonably prejudice the legitimate
interests of the rights holders, and also so as not to be
detrimental to the exploitation of the rule. Similarly, in the
case of exceptions, a rule could allow an interpretation to be
extended in certain circumstances, as well as including new
limitations. Having to wait for interpretations by the courts
or for periodic legislative reviews would, in our opinion, make
the process slower and costlier. Although it is true that an
open clause may generate certain legaluncertainty, it also
creates a more agile system that can, at any rate, be corrected
subsequently by the courts or by legislative bodies.

We adhere to the statement by LIBER:

A general open-ended exception, compatible with the Three Step
Test, is required. This will avoid obsolescence and ensure that
any new copyright regime can accommodate future digital
innovations, maintain European competitiveness and be
interoperable with copyright regimes such as those in force in
the United States. In an era of fast-moving technologies, we
believe a closed list of exceptions is not flexible enough to
allow European research institutions to compete with those in
the United States and Asia, where fair use is already in place.

Does the territoriality of limitations and exceptions, in your
experience,constitute a problem?

YES–Please explain why andspecify which exceptions you are
referring to

The territoriality of the exceptions requires knowledge of one’s
own laws as well as those of others, when the intention is to
share content with residents of other States, i.e., it requires
users to be experts on different copyright laws. Moreover we
have already mentioned cases, such as the exceptions
ofquotationor illustration in teaching, that provide examples
of the legal uncertainty generated by the lack of common
exceptions in all Member States.

Other cases affected by territoriality are: preservation and
interlibrary loan, a service that should be feasible to conduct
throughout all EU countries without obstacles.

We adhere to the statement by LIBER:

One example of this might be material in a particular language.
Sharing it with other people who speak the same language (but
who reside in another country) might be desirable but in order
to do this you currently have to be an expert in your own
copyright laws and those of other countries.

In the event that limitationsand exceptionsestablished at
national level were to have cross-border effect, howshouldthe
question of “fair compensation” be addressed, whensuch
compensation is part of the exception? (e.g. who pays whom,
where?)

[Open question]

The management of fair compensation transnationally should take
place at the European level and be funded directly by Member
States, in order to help the user avoid having to pay multiple
royalties.

Access to content in libraries and archives

Directive2001/29/EC enablesMember Statesto reflect in their
national law a rangeoflimitations andexceptions for the benefit
of publicly accessible libraries, educational establishments and
museums, as well as archives. If implemented, these
exceptionsallow acts of preservation and archiving41

Article 5(2)c of Directive 2001/29.

andenable on-site consultation oftheworks and other subject
matter in the collections of such institutions42

Article 5(3)nof Directive 2001/29.

. The public lending(under an exception orlimitation)by these
establishments of physical copies of works and other subject
matter is governed by the Rental and Lending Directive43

Article 5 of Directive 2006/115/EC.

.

Questionsarise as to whetherthe current framework continues to
achieve the objectives envisaged or whether it needs to be
clarified or updated to cover use in digital networks. At the
same time, questions arise as to the effect of such a possible
expansion on the normal exploitation of works and other subject
matter and as to the prejudice this may cause to rightholders.
The role of licensing and possible framework agreements between
different stakeholders also needsto be considered here.

Preservationand archiving

The preservation of the copies of worksor othersubject-matter
held in the collections of cultural establishments (e.g. books,
records, or films)– the restoration or replacement of works, the
copying of fragile works -mayinvolvethe creation ofanother
copy/iesof these worksor othersubject matter. Most Member
States provide for an exception in their national laws allowing
for the making of such preservation copies.The scope of the
exceptiondiffersfrom Member State to Member State(as regardsthe
type of beneficiary establishments, the types of
works/subject-mattercovered by the exception, the mode of
copyingand the number of reproductions that a beneficiary
establishment may make).Also, the current legal status of new
types of preservation activities (e.g. harvesting and archiving
publicly available web content) is often uncertain.

(a)[In particular if you arean institutional user:]Haveyou
experienced specific problems when trying to use an exception
to preserve and archive specific works or other subject matter
in your collection?

YES– Please explain, by Member State, sector, and the type of
use in question.

In the digital environment, it is sometimes not possible to make
preservation copies because of technological security measures
preventing it. It is necessary to ensure the ability to make
preservation copies in perpetuity (given the rapid obsolescence
of formats), and without limits to the number of copies to be
made (as with any exception, the application of the exception
must be done without affecting the normal exploitation of the
work and without causing unreasonable harm to the legitimate
interests of rights holders).

On this point we also adhere to the statement by LIBER:

Legal uncertainty around the ability of libraries to make copies
of published and unpublished works for the purpose of
preservation must be addressed. A mandatory exception which
allows libraries to make copies and shift formats for
preservation is essential in order to ensure sustained access
to cultural and scientific heritage into the future.

If there are problems, how would theybestbe solved?

[Open question]

On this point we adhere to the statement by LIBER:

A mandatory exception which allows libraries to make copies and
shift formats for preservation is essential in order to ensure
sustained access to cultural and scientific heritage into the
future.

If your view is that a legislative solution is needed, what
would be its main elements? Which activities of the beneficiary
institutions should be coveredand under which conditions?

[Open question]

Libraries, archives and museums, at the very least, should be
guaranteed the possibility of making copies for preservation
purposes, of both published and unpublished materials,
permanently and in any format. Furthermore the law should
ensure that the same use can be made of these copies as that
allowed for the original works.

If your view is thatadifferent solutionisneeded, what would it
be?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Off-premises access to library collections

Directive 2001/29/EC provides an exception
fortheconsultationofworks and other subject-matter(consulting
an e-book, watching a documentary) viadedicated terminals on
the premises of such establishmentsfor the purpose of research
and private study. The online consultation ofworks and other
subject-matter remotely(i.e. when the library user is not on
the premises of the library)requires authorisation andis
generallyaddressed in agreements between universities/libraries
and publishers.Some argue that the law rather than agreements
should provide for the possibility to, and the conditions
for,grantingonline access to collections.

(a)[In particular if you are an institutional user:]Have you
experienced specific problems when trying to negotiate
agreements with rights holders that enable you to provide
remote access, including across borders,to your collections (or
parts thereof) for purposes of research and private study?

[Open question]

Often it is not possible to negotiate such contracts because the
conditions are imposed by the information resource provider. In
the case of some small suppliers, especially in dealing with
customers that are large organizations, conditions for access
to the material are still not well defined, due to ignorance of
the law. In the case of some e-books, the suppliers only allow
local access to the works, and therefore there is no
possibility of agreeing on remote access.

If there are problems, how would theybestbe solved?

[Open question]

Legislation should ensure that an institution’s users can access
resources subscribed to by their institution, remotely from any
location.

If your view is that a legislative solution is needed, what
would be its main elements? Which activities of the beneficiary
institutions should be coveredand under which conditions?

[Open question]

Legislation should ensure that an institution’s users can access
resources subscribed to by their institution, remotely from any
location.

If your view is thatadifferent solutionisneeded, what would it
be?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

E –lending

Traditionally, public libraries haveloanedphysical copies of
works (i.e. books, sometimes also CDs and DVDs) to their users.
Recent technological developments have made it technically
possible for libraries to provide users with temporary access
to digital content, such as e-books, music or films via
networks. Under the current legal framework, libraries need to
obtain the authorisation of the rights holders
toorganisesuche-lending activities. In various Member States,
publishers and libraries are currently experimenting with
different business models for the making available of works
online, including direct supply of e-books to libraries by
publishers or bundling byaggregators.

(a)[In particular if you are alibrary:]Have you experienced
specific problems when trying tonegotiate agreements to enable
the electronic lending(e-lending), including across borders,
ofbooks or other materials held in your collection?

YES– Please explainwith specific examples

At present the models offered by suppliers do not meet the needs
of libraries and their users. Often e-books are not in a
lendable condition, because they do not take into account the
diversity of formats of reading devices or they include
security measures that prevent their being lent.

If there are problems, how wouldtheybestbe solved?

[Open question]

It should be ensured that all books on the market are available
to libraries from the time of their release, and that the books
are delivered in compatible formats, including formats adapted
for persons with disabilities. Likewise it should be ensured
that libraries can offer fixed-period loans of books purchased
outright or acquired under license. This should also be
extended to interlibrary loan as well as to the download of the
works both from within the library and remotely. All books
acquired should have continued access guaranteed, and the
access should be permanent in the case of books purchased
outright, together with the possibility of applying measures
for their long-term conservation (such as deposit, right to
transfer e-books to other platforms as required by
technological changes, free and unrestricted access to works no
longer available through commercial channels, and
non-contravention of laws related to books that have entered
into public domain). Suppliers should also be required to
provide metadata with their books, to be included in catalogues
and be accessible together with other metadata. The price of
e-books should not exceed that of the printed version and
should decrease in accordance with age as calculated from the
date of publication, and furthermore, all tax barriers
affecting electronic formats should be eliminated. Finally
respect for the privacy of users should be guaranteed.

Along these lines we support the positions of IFLA and EBLIDA on
e-lending.

The following two questions are relevant bothtothis point (n° 3)
and the previous one (n° 2).

[In particular if you are an institutional user:]What
differences do you see in the management of physical and online
collections, including providing access to your subscribers?
What problems have you encountered?

[Open question]

Many of the rights enjoyed by users in the analogue environment
have been lost in the digital environment. Current models
offered by providers of e-books in many cases are not adapted
to the needs of libraries. The differences are related to
accessibility, problems with formats, ability to provide actual
loans to users and to other libraries, guarantees for
preservation actions and perpetual access, pricing, taxes, etc.

[In particular if you are a right holder:]What difference do you
see betweenlibraries’traditional activities such as on-premises
consultation or public lending and activities such as
off-premises (online, at a distance) consultation and
e-lending? What problems have you encountered?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Mass digitisation

The term “mass digitisation” is normally used to refer to
efforts by institutions such as libraries and archives to
digitise (e.g. scan) the entire content or part of their
collections with an objective to preserve these collections
and, normally, to make them available to the public. Examples
are efforts by libraries to digitise novels form the early part
of the 20thcentury or whole collections of pictures of
historical value. This matter has been partly addressed at the
EU level by the 2011 Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) on key
principles on the digitisationand making available of out
of commerce works (i.e. works which are no longer found in the
normal channels of commerce),whichisaimingto facilitatemass
digitisation efforts (for books and learned journals) on the
basis of licence agreements between libraries and similar
cultural institutions on the one hand and the collecting
societies representing authors and publishers on the other44

You will find more information about his MoU on the following
website:http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/copyright/out-of-commerce/index_en.htm.

.Provided the required funding is ensured(digitisation projects
are extremely expensive),the result of this MoU should bethat
books that are currently to be found only in the archives of,
for instance, libraries will be digitised and made available
online to everyone.The MoU is based on voluntary licences
(granted by Collective Management Organisations on the basis of
the mandates they receive from authors and publishers). Some
Member States may need to enact legislation to ensure the
largest possibleeffect ofsuchlicences (e.g. by establishing in
legislation a presumption of representation of a collecting
society or the recognition of an “extended effect” to the
licences granted)45

France and Germany have already adopted legislation to back the
effects of the MoU.The French act (LOI n° 2012-287 du 1er mars
2012 relative à l'exploitation numérique des livres
indisponibles du xxe siècle) foresees collectivemanagement,
unless the author or publisher in question opposes such
management.The German act (Gesetz zur Nutzung verwaister und
vergriffener Werke und einer weiteren Änderung des
Urheberrechtsgesetzes vom 1.Oktober 2013) contains a legal
presumption of representation by a collectingsociety in
relation to works whose rightholdersare not members of the
collecting society.

.

[In particular if you are an institutional user,engaging or
wanting to engage in mass digitisation projects,a
rightholder,acollective management organisation:]Woulditbe
necessaryin your country to enact legislationto ensure
thattheresults of the 2011 MoU (i.e. the agreements concluded
between libraries and collecting societies) havea cross-border
effect sothatout of commerce workscan be accessedacross the EU?

YES– Please explainwhy and how it could best be achieved

It is necessary that all measures taken have cross-border
impact, as is already foreseen in the Directive on orphan
works.

Would it be necessary to develop mechanisms, beyond those
already agreed for other typesof content (e.g.for audio- or
audio-visual collections, broadcasters’ archives)?

YES– Please explain

Yes, because it is necessary to ensure the preservation of, and
access to, all documentary sources (there is a risk of losing
the 20thEuropean sound and audiovisual heritage). It is
therefore necessary to regulate at the European level the
problem of orphan and out-of-print for all kind of works, in
order to ensure the continued accessibility of documentary
heritage, regardless of type.

Teaching

Directive 2001/29/EC46

Article 5(3)aof Directive 2001/29.

enables Member States to implement in their national
legislationlimitations and exceptionsfor the purpose of
illustration fornon-commercialteaching. Such exceptions would
typically allow a teacher to use parts of or full works to
illustrate his course,e.g.by distributing copies of fragments
of a book or of newspaper articles in the classroom or by
showing protected content on a smart boardwithout having to
obtain authorisation from the right holders.The open
formulation of this (optional) provision allows for rather
different implementation at Member States level.The
implementation of the exception differs from Member State to
Member State, with several Member States providinginsteada
framework for the licensing of contentforcertain
educationaluses. Some argue that the lawshould provide for
better possibilities for distance learningand study at home.

(a)[In particular if youare an enduser/consumeror an
institutional user:]Have you experienced specific problems when
trying to use works orother subject-matter for illustration for
teaching, including across borders?

YES–Please explain

In Spain the wording of the exception on illustration for
teaching is very restrictive, allowing only teachers in
official educational institutions to use small fragments of
works (excepttextbooks and university textbooks) to illustrate
what they are teaching in their classrooms. Any other use
requires them to apply for authorization from the rights
holders, a process which is complex, costly and may require
negotiation with many types of rights holders in different
countries (in addition to the complexity of finding out the
identity of the person or entity entitled to authorize such
uses) .

In order to use material for illustration purposes, the teacher
frequently needs to have immediate access to works disseminated
across different media; therefore, applying for authorization is
often not a suitable system for enabling this type of use. A
modification of the legislation is foreseen for changing the
wording of the law, but the new draft does not improve the
situation in educational institutions, particularly for
universities, as it will represent for them a double payment
for the use of works for purposes of illustration for teaching.

In short, the current situation is faulty and unsatisfactory for
Spanish universities, some of which have even taken the matter
to court to debate the scope and application of copyright in
educational settings.

If there are problems, how wouldtheybestbe solved?

[Open question]

An exception is needed for all States to allow educational uses
without the need to obtain authorization from the intellectual
property rights holders. The requirements should be kept to the
minimal and essential ones: purposes of teaching, non-commercial
gain, reasonable use, and not subjected to compensation. (See
more detail in the answer to question # 45)

What mechanisms exist in the market place to facilitate the use
of content for illustration for teaching purposes?How
successful are they?

[Open question]

Some collecting societies offer licenses for educational use but
impose some abusive conditions that are very costly for
educational institutions and do not guarantee the use of all
works for educational purposes.

The inclusion in works of licenses such as Creative Commons by
rights holders is proving to be a very positive mechanism that
provides legal assurance for teaching staff.

If your view is that a legislative solution is needed, what
would be its main elements? Which activities of the beneficiary
institutions should be coveredand underwhatconditions?

[Open question]

European standards must make exceptions mandatory throughout all
Member States, as well as to establish the content thereof:

-to allow the use of any type of work, in both classroom and
virtual teaching settings;
- to include the right of transformation;
- to prohibit commercial intent;
- to omit limits on the extension of the work used (but rather
stipulate that the amount used be reasonable and the use be
appropriate for the intended purpose of teaching);
- to assure citation of the authorship and source;
- to omit requirements for compensation.

If your view is thatadifferent solutionisneeded, what would it
be?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Research

Directive 2001/29/EC47

Article 5(3)a of Directive 2001/29.

enables Member States to choose whether to implement in their
national laws a limitation for the purpose of non-commercial
scientific research.Theopenformulation of this (optional)
provision allows forratherdifferent implementationsat Member
States level.

(a)[In particular if you arean enduser/consumeror an
institutional user:]Haveyou experienced specific problems when
trying to use works or other subject matter in thecontextof
research projects/activities, including across borders?

YES–Please explain

Problems arise when copyright protected data or research results
are not available in Open Access under open licenses, thus
preventing reuse. These problems result in slowing research
activity.

If there are problems, how wouldtheybestbe solved?

[Open question]

Obstacles should be removed and Open Access mandated for all
those cases involving data and research results created with
public financing. EU legislation should establish some type of
exception in favor of research activities that would not only
allow them to be carried out without legal restrictions, but
also permit data and research results to be made public and
shared under open licenses that allow their reuse.

On this point we also adhere to the statement by LIBER (with a
slight modification for the possibility of agreeing on
embargoes,in brackets):

By increasing accessibility and availability, and by
facilitating the use and reuse of content, open access will
play an integral role in driving research excellence globally.
Copyright law should not hinder its progress. An exception or
legal instrument should be developed which allows researchers
to make the results of publicly funded research available
openly, regardless of contracts signed with a publisher
[although some sort of embargo system could be foreseen]. Open
data is also an area of growth and potential driver of research
and innovation. It is important to ensure that legal
Intellectual Property instruments such as theDatabase Directive
do not conflict with the realisation of this potential and
negate the huge public investment in research infrastructures
to support reuse of this data.

Any exception for research should not distinguish between
commercial and non-commercial research purposes. The definition
of non-commercial is vague and open to multiple interpretations.
The lines are becoming less defined between purely
non-commercial research and research that has commercial
potential or has been funded by commercial entities. Given that
universities are being encouraged to transfer knowledge,
discoveries and science to the private sector through the
so-called ‘Knowledge Transfer’ agenda in order to support the
competitiveness of Europe we believe there is a fundamental
economic need to amend copyright law in this manner.

What mechanisms exist in the Member States to facilitate the use
of content for research purposes?How successful are they?

[Open question]

The Spanish intellectual property
law(http://www.boe.es/buscar/act.php?id=BOE-A-1996-8930)provides
the following exceptions for research:

-Reproduction by museums, libraries, music libraries, film
libraries, or archives that are publicly owned or that form
part of cultural or scientific institutions that are non-profit
and dedicated solely to research. (Article 37.1)

-Use by way of quotation (Article 32.1)

-Use of databases for research purposes to the extent justified
for non-commercial needs. (Articles 34.2 and 135.1b)

-Communication of works from library collections, to be made
available only from specialized terminals located on library
premises, on payment of a fair compensation to the authors
(Article 37.3)

Experience shows that all the above cases are insufficient
measures due to their short range. They should therefore be
broadened. And, furthermore, as we have already mentioned,
research requires new exceptions related to data mining and the
reuse of publicly funded information.

Disabilities

Directive 2001/29/EC48

Article 5 (3)b of Directive 2001/29.

provides for an exception/limitation for the benefit of people
with a disability.The open formulation of this (optional)
provision allows for rather different implementationsat Member
States level.At EU and international level projects have been
launched to increase the accessibilityof works and other
subject-matterforpersons with disabilities (notably by
increasing the number of works published in special formats and
facilitating their distribution across the European Union)49

The European Trusted Intermediaries Network (ETIN)resulting
froma Memorandum of Understanding betweenrepresentatives of the
right-holder community (publishers, authors, collecting
societies) and interested parties such as associations for
blind and dyslexic
persons(http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/copyright/initiatives/access/index_en.htm)
and the Trusted Intermediary Global Accessible Resources (TIGAR)
project in WIPO (http://www.visionip.org/portal/en/).

.

The Marrakesh Treaty50

MarrakeshTreaty to Facilitate Access to Published Works by
Visually Impaired Persons and Persons with Print
Disabilities,Marrakesh, June 17 to 282013.

has been adopted to facilitate access to published works for
persons who are blind, visually impaired, or otherwise print
disabled. The Treaty creates a mandatory exception to copyright
that allows organisations for the blind to produce, distribute
and make available accessible format copies to visually
impaired persons without the authorisation of the rightholders.
The EU and its Member Stateshave startedwork to sign and ratify
the Treaty. This may require the adoption of certain provisions
at EU level (e.g. to ensure the possibility to exchange
accessible format copies across borders).

(a)[Inparticular if you are a person with a disability or an
organisation representing persons with disabilities:]Have you
experienced problems with accessibility to content, including
across borders,arising from Member States’ implementation of
this exception?

(b)[Inparticular if you are an organisationproviding services
for persons with disabilities:]Have you experienced problems
when distributing/communicating works published in special
formats across the EU?

(c)[In particular if you are arightholder:]Have you
experiencedspecificproblems resulting fromthe application of
limitations or exceptions allowing for the
distribution/communication of works published in special
formats, including across borders?

YES–Please explainby giving examples

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO

NO OPINION

Ifthere are problems, what could be done to improve
accessibility?

[Open question]

The right of transformation should be included among the
authorized acts. For example, to cover the inclusion of
subtitles in recorded works not already having them, or
incorporate a person performing a sign language translation in
a broadcasted work.

What mechanisms exist in the market place to facilitate
accessibility to content? How successful are they?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Text and data mining

Text and data mining/content mining/data analytics51

For the purpose of the present document, the term “text and data
mining” will be used.

are different terms used to describe increasingly important
techniques used in particular by researchers for the
exploration of vastamounts of existing texts and data (e.g.,
journals, web sites, databases etc.). Through the use of
software or other automated processes, an analysis is made of
relevant texts and data in order to obtain new insights,
patterns and trends.

The texts and data used for mining are either freely accessible
on the internet or accessible through subscriptions to e.g.
journals and periodicals that give access to the databases of
publishers. A copy is made of the relevant texts and data (e.g.
on browser cache memories or in computers RAM memories or onto
the hard disk of a computer), prior to the actual analysis.
Normally, it is considered that to mine protected works or
other subject matter, it is necessary to obtain authorisation
fromtherightholdersfor the making of such copiesunless such
authorisation can be implied (e.g. content accessible to
general public without restrictions on the internet,
openaccess).

Some argue that the copies required for text and data mining are
covered by the exception for temporary copies in Article 5.1 of
Directive 2001/29/EC. Others consider that text and data mining
activities should not even be seen as covered by copyright. None
of thisis clear, in particular since text and data mining does
not consist only of a single method, but can be undertaken in
several different ways. Important questions also remain as to
whether the main problems arising in relation to this issue go
beyond copyright (i.e. beyond the necessity or not to obtain
the authorisation to use content) and relate rather to the need
to obtain “access” to content (i.e. being able to use e.g.
commercial databases).

A specific Working Group was set up on this issue in the
framework of the "Licences for Europe" stakeholder dialogue. No
consensus was reached among participating stakeholders on either
the problems to be addressed or the results. At the same time,
practical solutions to facilitate text and data mining of
subscription-based scientific content were presented by
publishers as an outcome of “Licences for Europe”52

See the document “Licences for Europe – tenpledges to bring more
content
online”:http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/copyright/docs/licences-for-europe/131113_ten-pledges_en.pdf.

.In the context of these discussions, other stakeholders argued
that no additional licences should be required to mine material
to which access has been provided through a
subscriptionagreement and considered that a specific exception
for text and data mining should beintroduced, possibly on the
basis of a distinction between commercial and non-commercial.

(a)[In particular if you are an enduser/consumeror an
institutional user:]Haveyou experiencedobstacles,linked to
copyright,when trying to usetext or data miningmethods,
including across borders?

YES–Please explain

University research groups are hampered by not having the
certainty of being able to use data mining systems for
analyzing web pages or texts included in databases subscribed
to by their universities. Technological protection measures
also prevent the application of these techniques on content
subscribed to by libraries. Thus, libraries are not exploiting
the full potential of data mining for information retrieval of
the holdings to which they provide access.

If there are problems, how wouldtheybestbe solved?

[Open question]

A legal exception allowing data mining for research or
information retrieval by libraries or similar institutions is
recommended.

On this point we also adhere to the statement by LIBER:

A specific exception to allow the extraction of facts and data
for the purpose of text and data mining is essential. This will
facilitate the deployment of new research methods to exploit
lawfully-accessed digital content. Any exception should not
discriminate between commercial and non-commercial purposes.
Furthermore, distribution of the results of text and data
mining must be permissible so long as the results are not a
substitution for the original work. The implications of the
Database Directive for text and data mining should also be
reviewed and down-sized to accommodate this activity.

Researchers want the ability to data mine the open web, as well
as subscription-based content. We believe that a legislative
solution is very much needed. This solution should allow data
mining of any content to which you have legal access. Countries
like the United States and Japan allow text and data mining in
their law.

If your view is that a legislative solution is needed, what
would be its main elements? Which activities should be
coveredand underwhatconditions?

[Open question]

The exception should allow data mining for research purposes,
and also for information retrieval by libraries and other
similar entities.

On this point we also adhere to the statement by LIBER:

A specific exception to allow the extraction of facts and data
for the purpose of text and data mining is essential. This will
facilitate the deployment of new research methods to exploit
lawfully-accessed digital content. Any exception should not
discriminate between commercial and non-commercial purposes.
Furthermore, distribution of the results of text and data
mining must be permissible so long as the results are not a
substitution for the original work. The implications of the
Database Directive for text and data mining should also be
reviewed and down-sized to accommodate this activity.

Researchers want the ability to data mine the open web, as well
as subscription-based content. We believe that a legislative
solution is very much needed. This solution should allow data
mining of any content to which you have legal access. Countries
like the United States and Japan allow text and data mining in
their law.

If your view is thatadifferent solutionisneeded, what would it
be?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Are there other issues, unrelated to copyright, that constitute
barriers to the use of text or data mining methods?

[Open question]

The legislation on the protection of personal data. For example,
information published freely over the Internet is not considered
as a source of publicly available information. Therefore it is
not possible to perform data mining on web pages containing
personal data without the consent of the persons concerned,
regardless of whether the data is freely available.

User-generated content

Technological and service developments mean that citizens can
copy, use and distribute content at little to no financial
cost. As a consequence, new types of online activities are
developing rapidly, including the making of so-called
“user-generated content”. While users can create totally
original content,theycan also take one or several pre-existing
works, change somethinginthe work(s), and upload the result on
the Internet e.g. to platforms and blogs53

A typical example could be the “kitchen” or “wedding” video
(adding one's own video to a pre-existing sound recording), or
adding one's own text to a pre-existing photograph.Other
examples are “mash-ups” (blending two sound recordings), and
reproducing parts of journalistic work (report, review etc.) in
a blog.

. User-generated content (UGC) can thus coverthe modification of
pre-existing works even if the newly-generated/"uploaded" work
does notnecessarilyrequire a creative effort and results from
merely adding, subtracting or associating some pre-existing
content with other pre-existing content. This kind ofactivityis
not “new” as such. However, the development of social networking
and social media sitesthatenable users to share content widely
has vastly changed the scale of such activities and increased
the potential economic impact forthose holding rights inthe
pre-existing works. Re-use is no longer the preserve of
a technically and artistically adept elite. With the
possibilities offered by the new technologies,re-use is open to
all, at no cost.This in turn raises questionswith regard to
fundamental rights suchthe freedom of expression and theright
to property.

A specific Working Group was set up on this issue in the
framework of the"Licences for Europe" stakeholder dialogue. No
consensuswas reachedamong participating stakeholders on either
the problems tobe addressed or the resultsor even the
definition of UGC.Nevertheless, awide range of viewswere
presentedas to the best way to respond to this phenomenon.
Oneviewwasto say that a new exception is needed to cover UGC,in
particular non-commercial activities by individuals such as
combining existing musical works with videos, sequences of
photos, etc.Anotherview wasthat no legislative change is
needed: UGC is flourishing, and licensing schemes are
increasingly available (licence schemes concluded between
rightholders and platforms as well as micro-licences concluded
between rightholders and the usersgenerating thecontent. In any
event, practical solutions to ease user-generated content and
facilitate micro-licensing for small users werepledgedby
rightholders across different sectors as a result of the
“Licences for Europe” discussions54

See the document “Licences for Europe – tenpledges to bring more
content
online”:http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/copyright/docs/licences-for-europe/131113_ten-pledges_en.pdf.

.

(a)[In particular if you are an enduser/consumer:]Have you
experienced problems when trying to use pre-existing works or
other subject matter to disseminate new content on the
Internet, including across borders?

(b)[In particular if you are aservice provider:]Have you
experienced problems when users publish/disseminatenew content
based on the pre-existing works or other subject-matter through
your service, including across borders?

(c)[In particular if you are a right holder:]Have you
experiencedproblems resulting from the waythe usersare using
pre-existing works or other subject-matter to disseminate new
content on the Internet, including across borders?

YES– Please explain by giving examples

Users who want to make changes to existing works and then upload
them to an online platform, while at the same time respecting
the law, face the difficult task of having to consult the
legislation of all countries where the resulting work may be
displayed. This hypothetical assumption is unrealistic in view
of current manners of working with internet platforms and
social networks, where spontaneity, immediacy and freedom of
expression are the norm. User generated content is frequent and
carried out daily without taking into account legal
considerations. It is not a case of voluntary infringement of
the law, but rather of activities that can be recognized as
innocuous and without legal or economic significance.

(a)[In particular if you are an end user/consumer or aright
holder:]Have you experienced problems when trying to ensure
that the work you have created (on the basis of pre-existing
works) is properly identified for online use?Are proprietary
systems sufficient in this context?

(b)[In particular if you are a service provider:]Do you provide
possibilities for users that are publishing/disseminating the
works they have created (on the basis of pre-existing works)
through your service to properly identify these works for
online use?

YES – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO OPINION

(a)[In particular if you are an enduser/consumeror aright
holder):]Have you experienced problems when trying to be
remunerated for the use of the work you have created (on the
basis of pre-existing works)?

(b)[In particular if you are a service provider:]Do you provide
remuneration schemes for users publishing/disseminating the
works they have created (on the basis of pre-existing works)
through your service?

YES – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO OPINION

If there are problems, how would theybestbe solved?

[Open question]

These cases must be addressed by the modification of the legal
framework to make it more flexible and adaptable to new
situations that arise from changing technologies and new,
socially accepted uses of copyright protected works.

All use of works that is innocuous and without economic
significance to rights owners should be authorized. A legal
exception to this effect could be established and also include
a clause similar to "fair use" in the United States, in
anticipation of new situations that may arise in the future. As
a limit for preventing abuse of the rule, the 3-step rule will
apply.

If your view is that a legislative solution is needed, what
would be its main elements? Which activities should be
coveredand underwhatconditions?

[Open question]

The legal framework should be amended in order to make it more
flexible and adaptable to new situations that arise with
changing technologies and socially accepted new uses of
copyright protected works. All use of works that is innocuous
and without economic significance to rights owners should be
authorized. A legal exception to this effect could be
established and also include a clause similar to "fair use" in
the United States, in anticipation of new situations that may
arise in the future. As a limit for preventing abuse of the
rule, the 3-step rule will apply.

This legal change should be considered obligatory for all States
and the terms defined in the European standard.

If your view is thatadifferent solutionisneeded, what would it
be?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Private copying and reprography

Directive 2001/29/EC enables Member States to implement in their
national legislation exceptions or limitations to the
reproduction right for copies made for private useand
photocopying55

Article 5. 2)(a) and (b)of Directive 2001/29.

.Levies are charges imposed at national level on goods typically
used forsuch purposes(blank media, recording equipment,
photocopying machines, mobile listening devices such as mp3/mp4
players, computers, etc.) with a viewtocompensating rightholders
forthe harm they suffer whencopiesaremade
withouttheirauthorisation by certain categories of persons
(i.e. natural persons making copies for their private use)
orthroughuse of certain technique (i.e. reprography).In that
context, levies are importantforrightholders.

With the constant developments in digital technology, the
question arises as to whether the copying of files
byconsumers/end-userswho have purchasedcontent online -e.g.
when a person has bought an MP3 fileandgoes on
tostoremultiplecopies of thatfile(in her computer, her tablet
and her mobile phone)-alsotriggers, or should trigger,the
application of private copying levies. It is argued that, in
some cases,these leviesmay indeedbe claimedby
rightholderswhetheror notthelicence feepaid by the service
provideralready covers copies made bythe enduser.
Thisapproachcould potentially lead to instances of double
payments whereby levies could be claimed on top ofservice
providers’licencefees56

Communication "Unleashing the Potential of Cloud Computing in
Europe", COM(2012) 529 final.

57

These issues were addressed in the recommendations of Mr António
Vitorino resulting from the mediation on private copying and
reprography levies.Youcan consult these recommendationson the
following
website:http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/copyright/docs/levy_reform/130131_levies-vitorino-recommendations_en.pdf.

.

There is also an on-going discussion as to the application or
not of levies to certain types ofcloud-based services such as
personal lockers or personal video recorders.

In your view, is there a need to clarifyat the EU levelthe scope
and application of theprivate copyingand reprographyexceptions58

Art. 5.2(a) and 5.2(b) of Directive 2001/29/EC.

in the digital environment?

YES–Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO–Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO OPINION

Should digital copies made by end users for private purposes in
the context of a service that has been licensed by
rightholders, and where theharmto the rightholder is minimal,
be subject to private copying levies?59

This issue was also addressed in the recommendations of Mr
Antonio Vitorino resulting from the mediation on private
copying and reprography levies

 YES – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO OPINION

How wouldchanges inlevieswith respect to the application
toonline services (e.g.services based oncloud computing
allowing, for instance,usersto have copieson
differentdevices)impactthe development and functioning
ofnewbusiness modelson the one hand and rightholders’ revenue
on the other?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Would you see an added value in making levies visibleon the
invoices for products subject to levies?60

This issue was also addressed in the recommendations of Mr
Antonio Vitorino resulting from the mediation on private
copying and reprography levies.

YES–Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO–Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO OPINION

Divergingnational systems levy different products and apply
different tariffs. This results in obstacles tothefree
circulation of goods and servicesin the Single Market.At the
same time, many Member States continue to
allowtheindiscriminate application of private copying levies to
all transactions irrespective of the person to whom the product
subject to a levyis sold(e.g. private person or business). In
that context, not all Member States have ex ante exemption
and/or ex post reimbursement schemes which could remedy these
situations and reduce the number of undue payments61

This issue was also addressed in the recommendations of Mr
Antonio Vitorino resulting from the mediation on private
copying and reprography levies.

.

Have you experienced a situation whereacross-border transaction
resulted inundue levy payments, or duplicate payments of the
same levy, or other obstacles to the free movement of goods or
services?

YES–Pleasespecify the type of transaction and indicate
thepercentageoftheundue payments. Please also indicatehowa
priori exemption and/orex post reimbursement schemes could help
to remedy the situation.

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO–Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO OPINION

What percentage of products subject to a levy is sold to persons
other than natural persons for purposes clearly unrelated to
private copying? Do any of those transactions result in undue
payments? Please explain in detail the example you provide
(type of products, type of transaction, stakeholders, etc.).

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Where such undue payments arise, what percentage of trade do
they affect? To what extent could a priori exemptionsand/orex
post reimbursement schemes existingin some Member Stateshelp to
remedy the situation?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Ifyou have identified specificproblemswith the
currentfunctioning of thelevy system, howwouldthese
problemsbestbesolved?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Fairremuneration of authors and performers

TheEUcopyrightacquisrecognises for authors and performers a
number of exclusive rights and, in the case of performers whose
performances are fixed in phonograms, remuneration rights. There
are few provisions in the EU copyright law governing
thetransferof rights from authors or performers to producers62

See e.g. Directive 92/100/EEC, Art.2(4)-(7).

or determining who the owner of the rights is when the work or
other subject matter is created in the context ofanemployment
contract63

See e.g.Art. 2.3. of Directive 2009/24/EC,Art. 4 of Directive
96/9/EC.

.Thisis an area that has been traditionally left for Member
States to regulate and there are significant differences in
regulatory approaches.Substantial differences also existbetween
differentsectors ofthecreative industries.

Concerns continue to be raised that authors and performers are
not adequately remunerated, in particularbut not solely, as
regards online exploitation. Many consider that the economic
benefit of new forms of exploitation is not being fairly shared
along the whole value chain. Another commonly raised issue
concerns contractual practices, negotiation mechanisms,
presumptions of transfer of rights, buy-out clauses and the
lack of possibility to terminate contracts. Some stakeholders
are of the opinion that rules atnational leveldonotsuffice to
improve their situation and that action at EU level is
necessary.

[In particular if you arean author/performer:] What is the best
mechanism (or combination of mechanisms) to ensurethatyou
receive an adequate remuneration for the exploitation of your
works and performances?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Istherea need to actat theEU level (for instance to prohibit
certain clauses in contracts)?

YES–Please explain

In Spain the law requires authors and performers to be
remunerated by anyone are making their works available or
performing them, when these same authors and performers have
ceded their own rights to a producer. This payment should not
be required in those cases in which the display or performance
has no commercial purpose whatsoever, or where its purpose is
for research or teaching.

Ifyou consider that the current rules are not effective, what
would you suggest to addresstheshortcomingsyou identify?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Respectforrights

Directive 2004/48/EE64

Directive 2004/48/EC of the European Parliament and of the
Council of 29 April 2004 on the enforcement of intellectual
property rights.

provides for a harmonised framework for the civil enforcement of
intellectual property rights, including copyright and related
rights. The Commission has consulted broadly on this text65

You will find more information on the following
website:http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/iprenforcement/directive/index_en.htm

. Concerns have been raised as to whether some of its provisions
are still fit to ensure a proper respectforcopyright in the
digital age. On the one hand, the current measures seem to be
insufficient to deal with the new challenges brought by the
dissemination of digital content on the internet; on the other
hand, there are concerns about the current balance between
enforcement of copyright and the protection of fundamental
rights, in particular the right for a private life and data
protection. While it cannot be contested that enforcement
measures should always be available in caseofinfringement of
copyright, measures could be proposed to strengthen respect for
copyright when the infringed content is used for a commercial
purpose66

For example when the infringing content is offered on a website
which gets advertising revenues that depend on the volume of
traffic.

. One means to do this could be to clarify the role of
intermediaries in the IP infrastructure67

This clarification should not affect the liability regime of
intermediary service providers established by Directive
2000/31/EC on electronic commerce, which will remain unchanged.

. At the same time,there could beclarification of the
safeguardsforrespect of private life and data protection for
private users.

Shouldthe civil enforcement system in the EU be rendered more
efficient for infringements of copyright committed with a
commercial purpose?

YES–Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO–Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO OPINION

In particular,isthe current legal framework clear enough to
allow forsufficient involvement of intermediaries (such as
Internet service providers, advertising brokers, payment
service providers, domain name registrars, etc.) in inhibiting
online copyright infringements with a commercial purpose? If
not, whatmeasureswould be useful to foster the cooperation of
intermediaries?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Does the current civil enforcement framework ensure that the
right balance is achieved between the right to have one’s
copyright respected and other rights such as the
protectionofprivate life and protection of personal data?

YES–Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO–Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO OPINION

AsingleEU CopyrightTitle

The idea ofestablishing aunifiedEU CopyrightTitlehas
beenpresentin the copyright debate for quite some time
now,although views as to the merits andthefeasibility of suchan
objectiveare divided.Aunified EUCopyrightTitlewouldtotally
harmonise the area of copyright law in the EU and replace
national laws. There would then be a single EU title instead of
a bundle of national rights.Some seethisas the only manner in
which a truly Single Market for content protected by copyright
can be ensured,whileothersbelieve that the same
objectivecanbetterbe achieved by establishing a higher level of
harmonisation while allowing for a certain degree of flexibility
and specificity in Member States’legal systems.

ShouldtheEU pursue the establishment of asingle
EUCopyrightTitle,as a means of establishing a consistent
framework for rights and exceptions to copyright across the EU,
as well as a single framework for enforcement?

YES

Should this be the next step in the development of copyright in
the EU? Does the current level of difference among the Member
State legislation mean that this is a longer term project?

[Open question]

The rapid evolution of technology and the current globalized
environment make it necessary to establish this issue as a
short-term goal. A single legal instrument with direct effect
in all Member States of the European Union is needed, which
would include a single common catalogue of exceptions, and also
a clause similar to "fair use" in the United States to allow the
system to be adapted to new situations as they arise.

Other issues

The above questionnaire aimstoprovidea comprehensive
consultation on the most important matters relating to the
current EU legal framework for copyright.Shouldany important
matters have been omitted,we would appreciate if you could
bring them to our attention, so they can be properly addressed
in the future.

Are there any other important matters related to the EU legal
framework forcopyright?Pleaseexplainandindicatehow such matters
should be addressed.

[Open question]

On this point we adhere to the statement by LIBER:

One issue that is not raised in the consultation is the
fundamental issue of what users of copyright law can do with
licensed content. Education / research / library exceptions
cannot be ”trumped” by individual contract.

In the digital environment, consultation and considered reform
of copyright exceptions will be ineffective without a provision
safeguarding copyright exceptions and limitations from override
by contract or technological protection measures. In the case
of technological prevention measures, the copyright framework
should also recognise the occasional need for libraries to use
or create software that can help circumvent these measures for
the purpose of making and facilitating lawful use of a work.

