


Response to Public Consultation on the Review of EU Copyright
Rules – 5 March 2014

Name:      International Federation of Library Associations &
Institutions (IFLA)

Type of respondent:  Other

TheInternational Federation of Library Associations and
Institutions(IFLA) is the leading international body
representing the interests of library and information services
and their users. With over 1450 members in 150 countries around
the world, IFLA is the global voice of the library and
information profession. IFLA represents over 680 libraries from
across Europe, and from every EU Member State.

IFLA is also leading international library advocacy on copyright
exceptions and limitations before the Standing Committee on
Copyright & Related Rights (SCCR) of the World Intellectual
Property Organisation (WIPO). IFLA believes that an
international instrument mandating certain copyright exceptions
and limitations facilitating use of, and access to information
through libraries is a key component of a digitally inclusive,
innovative knowledge society.

Overview of submission

In September 2013, the European Parliament recognised the need
to reform EU copyright rules within its European Parliamentary
resolution on “Promoting the European Cultural and Creative
Sectors as sources of economic growth and jobs”(T7-0368/2013).1

European Parliament resolution of 12 September 2013 on promoting
the European cultural and creative sectors as sources of
economic growth and jobs (2012/2302(INI))

In that resolution, the European Parliament:

52.  Stresses that the existence of 27 different intellectual
property rights management systems is a particular burden for
Europe's CCS, and that the current fragmented regime needs to
be reformed to facilitate access to, and increase (global)
circulation of, content, and in such a way as to enable
artists, creators, consumers, businesses and audiences to
benefit from digital developments, new distribution channels,
new business models and other opportunities;

53.    Believes that in the digital era, a modern and balanced
system for protecting intellectual property rights (IPRs) which
makes it possible both to ensure appropriate remuneration for
all categories of rightholders and to guarantee that consumers
have easy access to diverse, legal content and a real choice in
terms of linguistic and cultural diversity, is an essential
condition for ensuring that the CCS are competitive;

54.    Stresses that the protection of IPRs should not threaten
the neutrality of the internet.”

IFLA believes a balanced copyright reform should provide
sufficient protections for EU creative industries without
restricting essential research and development, and access to
information in the public interest.

IFLA’s submission focuses on:

Linking and browsing (11-12)

Limitations and exceptions in the Single Market (21-27)

eLending (36 – 39)

Text and data mining (54-55)

Internet intermediary responsibilities (76)

Questions that are unanswered should not be interpreted as of
low importance to libraries in the European Union. A number of
IFLA members are putting in their own submissions addressing
these questions, with the benefit of regional examples. IFLA’s
submission limits itself to questions where the experiences of
its international membership may prove beneficial.

In summary, IFLA’s submission maintains that:

There is a need for a flexible, open ended exception to better
keep pace with evolving technologies and services;

In an increasingly globalized environment (and the EU Single
Market), any exceptions (both existing and proposed) in the EU
Copyright Directive should be mandatory, prevented from
override by contract, and facilitate cross border access to and
use of works in the public interest;

Protections and enforcement mechanisms for right holders must be
carefully defined so as not to place onerous responsibilities on
public institutions providing access to information.

Linking and Browsing

Should the provision of a hyperlink leading to a work or other
subject matter protected under copyright, either in general or
under specific circumstances, be subject to the authorisation
of the rightholder?

No.

Linking is a ubiquitous aspect of internet use and essential to
the architecture of the internet. Links facilitate the
availability of content online, and contribute to site activity
and visibility.

Linking is elemental to modern librarianship and research. It is
extremely common for librarians to link users to online
resources, and to include links to content made available on
other sites in library catalogues. Links are a habitual element
of wikis, Rich Site Summary (RSS) feeds, engagement on social
networks and blogs published by libraries. It is common
research practice to include hyperlinks in footnotes and
bibliographies of research articles and in general research
collaboration.

The final report of the Copyright Review Committee in Ireland
considers interconnectedness by linking to be at the ‘very
heart of the internet’.2

Copyright Review Committee Final Report, prepared for the
Department of Jobs, Enterprise and Innovation, Dublin
(2013)http://www.enterprise.gov.ie/en/Publications/CRC-Report.pdf(p
11)

In that report, the Copyright Committee recommended that linking
should not infringe copyright, except where the provider of the
link knew or ought to have been aware that it connects with an
infringing copy.3

Ibid.

While IFLA believes the Copyright Committee’s recommendation
goes some way to recognizing the validity of linking, IFLA is
concerned by the condition on links to ‘infringing copies’.
What constitutes an ‘infringing copy’ is unclear, and if
defined poorly, impossible to police. How is the individual or
institution to know whether an item linked to is an infringing
copy? In many cases (photographs, for example), it can be
difficult to distinguish whether the item is infringing or not.

The European Court of Justice’s recent judgment in
theSvenssoncase has further increased IFLA’s concerns regarding
copyright rulemaking with respect to hyperlinking. In their
judgment, the ECJ considered hyperlinking to protected works
already freely available from another website would not be an
infringement of copyright, unless the works were made available
to a ‘new public’.4

Case C-466/12 Svensson, judgment issued 13 February 2014,
paragraph 24

What would constitute a ‘new public’ is undefined, and online is
arguably hard to pin down. What if a library were to tweet a
deep link to an article accessible within their own country,
but geoblocked for users in another jurisdictions? Has the
library made the article available to a ‘new public’? What if
the accessibility of an item changes, but at the time a link
was provided was generally accessible to the public? Could the
ECJ’s judgment require institutions and individuals to
regularly monitor existing links on their websites to ensure
the content they link to does not inadvertently link to a ‘new
public’?

IFLA believes that reform of copyright rules today must, so far
as is possible, work with the architecture of theinternet, and
not against it. Any consideration of hyperlinking as
potentially within the exclusive right of the copyright holder
is dangerous to the effective functioning of the internet. IFLA
believes that links, which merely

operate as a reference to content available elsewhere on a
website (analogous to an index, a catalogue record, listed page
numbers), are best considered as “units of information” – not
capable of copyright protection. Further, IFLA wishes to
reiterate the borderless nature of the internet and online
communications. To what extent could a provision subjecting
hyperlinking to the authorization of the right holder in the EU
be actively enforced, if linking is not an infringement of
copyright in other jurisdictions? How could it be actively
enforced, if linking – both hyper linking and inline, or
embedded linking – is ubiquitous online? Reform of copyright
laws for the internet environment must have regard for the
global nature of that environment. IFLA cautions against
protections for hyper-linking that could place European
innovators, researchers, public institutions at a disadvantage
contributing to a globally competitive knowledge economy.

Should the viewing of a web-page where this implies the
temporary reproduction of a work or other subject matter
protected under copyright on the screen and in the cache memory
of the user’s computer, either in general or under specific
circumstances, be subject to the authorisation of the
rightholder?

No.

Caching, indexing, conduit and other internet-related functions
are essential to facilitate efficient internet navigation.
Caching and indexing are activities undertaken by every
intermediary providing web services – government providers,
educational institutions, libraries and archives, consumers and
commercial entities.

Libraries use caching and indexing to facilitate speed and
efficiency of search. Digital repositories in libraries require
caching mechanisms to provide accurate, fast results:

“This may be through wholesale replication of datasets using a
system such as Akamai to geographically disparate locations, the
use of local caching systems such as varnish and memcache on the
primary site, or the use of tools such as zoomify to provide
different resolution views of data. Sites that use such tools
for legitimate purposes to enhance the user experience should
not be seen as breaching copyright even if the original licence
to use the data does not include such surrogatedata.”

The introduction of protections for temporary copies would in
effect – in cost and/or authorisations required - prevent
libraries from delivering online services.

IFLA reiterates its concerns regarding the creation of new
copyright protections in the EU for essential internet
functions that elsewhere are considered non-infringing.

In the United Kingdom, the Hargreaves Review of Intellectual
Property and Growth recommended the implementation of an
exception for ‘non consumptive use’ – defined in that review as
use of a work enabled bytechnology that did not trade on the
underlying purpose of the work.5

I Hargreaves,Digital Opportunity: A Review of Intellectual
Property and Growth(2011), 47; it should be noted that
Hargreaves also considers data mining a potential
non-consumptive use within the scope of his definition

In considering indexing and caching (and other internet
functions), Hargreaves wrote:

“that these new uses happen to fall within the scope of
copyright regulation is essentially a side effect of how
copyright has been defined, rather than being directly relevant
to what copyright is supposed to protect.”6

Ibid.

The CanadianCopyright Modernization Act 2012 (Cth)introduced a
specific exception for caching.7

Copyright Modernization Act, C-11 2012(Canada)

In New Zealand, a similar exception for caching exists.8

Copyright Act 1994(New Zealand), s92E

In the United States, indexing and caching, and related
transient copying, is considered non-infringing under the fair
use doctrine.9

Field v Google Inc412 F Supp 2d, 1106

In Australia, where a review of existing copyright exceptions
and limitations was recently concluded, the final report of the
Australian Law Reform Commission recommended the adoption of a
fair use provision which would encompass internet functions
like caching and indexing.10

Australian Law Reform Commission, Copyright and the Digital
Economy (Report no 122), published 13 February
2014,http://www.alrc.gov.au/publications/copyright-report-122

IFLA urges the European Commission to take into account the
impact copyright protection of transient, temporary or
otherwise ‘non consumptive’ copies in the EU will have on the
diversity of institutions and individuals providing online
services, including libraries. IFLA fears that an inflexible
approach to internet activities perceived as non-harmful in the
EU would see European libraries disadvantaged, falling behind
their North American and Australasian counterparts.

The current wave of legislative reform efforts taking place in
jurisdictions around the world, which consider (among other
questions) whether accepted internet services, functions and
new technologies may infringe copyright, to IFLA speaks to
profound problems at the heart of the definition of copyright.
If every new product or service which involves the making of a
copy could be considered on its face to be copyright
infringing, regardless of whether there is commercial harm to
the right holder, IFLA considers this both to be detrimental to
digital innovation, and an undue burden on the engines of law
reform.

Limitations and exceptions in the Single Market

21. Are there problems arising from the fact that most
limitations and exceptions provided in the EU copyright
directives are optional for the Member States?

Yes.

Despite the stated intention of Directive 2001/29/EC on the
Harmonisation of Certain Aspects of Copyright and Related
Rights in the Information Society11

, the optional nature of most limitations and exceptions in that
Directive has resulted in a cherry picking approach to
implementation at the Member State level.12

Guibault L, Why Cherry-Picking Never Leads to Harmonisation: the
Case of the Limitations on Copyright under Directive 2001/29/EC
(2010)http://dare.uva.nl/document/189209

Article 5(2)(c) of the Information Society directive allows
Member States to introduce limitations to the reproduction
right for specific acts of copying made by libraries (among
other public interest institutions), where they are not for
direct or indirect economic or commercial advantage.
Implementation of this optional limitation with respect to
library acts of reproduction by Member States has varied
significantly: some Member States limit reproductions to those
made in analogue formats; others specify different rules to
prescribe analogue copying as compared with digital copying;
and others limit the kinds of digital works that may be
copied.13

Ibid p 60

The Study on the Application of Directive 2001/29/EC on
Copyright & Related Rights in the InformationSociety,14

STUDY ON THE APPLICATION OF DIRECTIVE 2001/29/EC ON COPYRIGHT
AND RELATED RIGHTS IN THE INFORMATION SOCIETY (16 December
2013)http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/copyright/docs/studies/131216_study_en.pdf

commissioned by the European Commission and published in
December 2013, recognized the need to harmonize limitations and
exceptions for libraries and archives at the EU level. The
optional nature of limitations and exceptions, it considered,
had resulted in a patchwork approach to national implementation
which was, contrary to the borderless opportunities offered by
the internet environment, preventing cross-border
collaboration.15

Ibid 284.

“Imagine a national library digitizing its collection of
newspapers from the 19thand 20thcentury, in the frame of a
Europeana project to put on line newspapers relating to the
construction of the European Union after 1945. It makes no
doubt that the on-line dissemination of the newspapers, still
protected by copyright, will require authorization of the
copyright owners in all Member States. Depending on the
national copyright law applicable to the library, the
conditions to digitize the newspapers will be either exempted
by an exception or not…

Indeed, the more newspapers will be digitized, the more they
could be of some use for digital projects.Should some libraries
be impaired in their efforts to digitize parts of their
collections due to lack of harmonization of the exceptions to
the benefit of libraries and archives, all cultural heritage
institutions will not be on equal footing in such
trans-European projects.

For all these reasons, more efforts should be put on increasing
the harmonization in relation to the exception for certain acts
of reproduction made by libraries.”16

Ibid.

The internet environment offers new opportunities for cross
border library collaboration on preservation and digitization
projects and empowerment of an EU wide inclusive knowledge
society. Without harmonization of limitations and exceptions at
the EU level, IFLA fears that opportunities for cross border
collaboration are creating inefficiencies, leading to
information silos and distorting and creating discrepencies in
the EU Internal Market.17

Above n 26, 301.

Libraries and archives are investigating efficiencies in digital
preservation, including through shared (cross border) digital
infrastructure. To lawfully facilitate cross border resource
and infrastructure sharing for digital archiving, preservation
exceptions must have a cross border application. Similarly,
universities are increasingly introducing remote campuses in
other jurisdictions, as well as offering distance (online and
offline) education opportunities. University libraries serving
distance students often come into conflict with the territorial
nature of copyright exceptions, which distinguish the
educational materials a student of that institution can have
access to based on their location. This is contrary to stated
EU goals of common education systems.

As there is no harmonization of national law exceptions
facilitating (digital) document delivery, libraries are often
called to understand the legal status of this service in the
jurisdiction of destination of service. National copyright
limitations often differ regarding the technical prescription
of the permitted library service, and methods of document
supply change frequently with improvements in technology and
efficiencies. This further exacerbates legal uncertainties for
libraries, and can lead to licensing of services that are (or
may be) within the scope of statutory exceptions.

22. Should some/all of the exceptions be made mandatory and, if
so, is there a need for a higher level of harmonisation of such
exceptions?

Yes.

IFLA believes all limitations and exceptions should be
mandatory, as equal counterparts to rights and protections
afforded right holders.

23. Should any new limitations and exceptions be added to or
removed from the existing catalogue? Please explain by
referring to specific cases.

24. Independently from the questions above, is there a need to
provide for a greater degree of flexibility in the EU
regulatory framework for limitations and exceptions?

25. If yes, what would be the best approach to provide for
flexibility? (e.g. interpretation by national courts and the
ECJ, periodic revisions of the directives, interpretations by
the Commission, built-in flexibility, e.g. in the form of a
fair-use or fair dealing provision /open norm, etc.)? Please
explain indicating what would be the relative advantages and
disadvantages of such an approach as well as its possible
effects on the functioning of the Internal Market.

Yes.

IFLA supports the introduction of a flexible, open ended
exception that would encompass emerging library activities like
text and data mining, digital preservation and mass
digitization, as well as new uses of works in the digital
environment. In the event that an open ended exception was not
introduced, IFLA would support the introduction of a
purpose-based exception to facilitate text and data mining,
provided that it adequately meets the needs of researchers,
libraries and educational institutions undertaking TDM
activities that do not transact on the underlying works of
right holders.

It is also essential that, in the context of an increasingly
licence-based digital environment,a limitation be introduced on
contractual terms that purport to override statutory
exceptions.Without a provision that safeguards exceptions
against override by contract, any new or updated exceptions to
respond to the realities and opportunities of the digital
environment would be effectively useless.

A flexible, open ended exception meets a number of goals that
guide copyright reform processes: it can be technology neutral;
it supports innovation and competition; is in line with
international obligations; and can include criteria to guard
against uses of works unreasonably harmful to the right
holder.18

Australian Digital Alliance & Australian Libraries Copyright
Committee, submission to the Australian Law Reform Commission
(ALRC) Review of Copyright and the Digital Economy (2012)
[speaking specifically about ‘fair
use]http://digital.org.au/sites/digital.org.au/files/documents/FINAL%20ADA%20ALCC%20CopyRevSub.pdfp
71

The UKHargreaves Review of Intellectual Property and
Growthconsidered the benefits of the US ‘fair use’ provision19

Section 107,Copyright Act 1976(US)

, as one that ‘keeps copyright closer to the reasonable
expectations of most people and thus helps make sense of
copyright law.20

Ian Hargreaves,Digital Opportunity: A Review of Intellectual
Property and Growth(2011), 43. Countries without a fair use
doctrine have “witnessed a growing mismatch between what is
allowed under copyright exceptions, and the
reasonableexpectations and behaviour of most people.

IFLA has observed that libraries, and therefore the research
sector, in the US undertaking mass digitization projects, text
and data mining activities and indexing and caching are
increasingly moving ahead of their EUcounterparts, with the
benefit of a flexible exception.

In 2013, in response to the US District Court decision regarding
the legality of the Google Books project, IFLA published a
statement cautioning against the growing digital information
divide for libraries elsewhere:21

http://www.ifla.org/node/8177

“IFLA is concerned that the US District Court’s decision
reflects a widening digital divide between what libraries are
able to accomplish in the Unites States, as compared with the
rest of the world. IFLA represents more than 1500 library
associations and institutions in over 150 countries, many of
whom are operating under a patchwork of restrictive copyright
provisions ill-suited for the digital environment. IFLA
maintains that access to digital library collections of the
scale and nature of the Google Books project can be
anunprecedented source for the advancement of learning and
human development, and that this access should be universal.”

26. Does the territoriality of limitations and exceptions, in
your experience, constitute a problem?

27. In the event that limitations and exceptions established at
national level were to have cross-border effect, how should the
question of “fair compensation” be addressed, when such
compensation is part of the exception? (e.g. who pays whom,
where?)

Yes.

We believe that the only workable situation will be for member
states to apply their own legal traditions in respect to this
issue.

eLending

36: Have you experienced specific problems when trying to
negotiate agreements to enable the electronic lending
(e-lending), including across borders, of books or other
materials held in your collection?

37. If there are problems, how would they best be solved?

38. What differences do you see in the management of physical
and online collections, including providing access to your
subscribers? What problems have you encountered?

Yes.22

IFLA’s response reflects the input of its EU members

Copyright challenges associated with eLending have been
identified as an advocacy priority by IFLA members. In 2013,
IFLA launched itsPrinciples for Library eLending,23

IFLA Principles for Library eLending
(2013),http://www.ifla.org/node/7418

designed to assist library professionals worldwide as they
grapple with the complexities of eBook licence negotiations
with publishers and resellers. ThePrinciples for Library
eLendingwere the result of eighteen months research and
consultation by the IFLA eLending Working Group, comprising
senior library professionals from around the world. In 2012,
the Working Group produced a Background Paper on eLending which
summarized emerging eBook, and associated digital lending
challenges for libraries at that time:

“…Librarians are struggling with how to maintain core
principles such as unfettered access to information for all in
the context of restricted access to eBooks and imposed eBook
licence requirements. A key challenge facing libraries in
providing access to eBooks is to arrive at licence agreements
which provide sufficient reassurance to publishers and authors
that library availability of their work supports rather than
undermines their business model while at the same time
permitting the library to continue its core functions.”24

IFLA Background Paper on eLending
(2011)http://www.ifla.org/files/assets/clm/publications/ifla-background-paper-e-lending-en.pdf

The Background Paper points to the propensity of digital content
licencing to undermine core library functions including
preservation, lending, permitted copying, inter library loan,
and the provision of accessible format works for the print
disabled. It also highlights the vulnerability of long held
library values, including the protection of patron privacy,
provision of equitable access to information, and the
independence of acquisition decisions in the licensing
environment.25

The IFLA Governing Board commissioned an update of the eLending
Background Paper in December 2013, to be completed in April
2014. IFLA would be glad to share this with the European
Commission when it has been finalized.

The internet has profoundly altered the management of library
collections. It is undisputed that online collections must be
managed in a different way to print collections – and libraries
have responded quickly to a number of those changes. While
adapting library tools and services to meet new technologies
and patron expectations is something libraries have a long
history with, the online environment has stymied library
adaptability in a number of ways that cut to the heart of their
public interest function.

The shift to eBooks has impacted on the independence of library
acquisition decision making. In print, if a book or other
published work was available to the public, it was generally
available to a library for purchase for their collection. With
online content, publishers have moved towards differential
pricing models for libraries, as well as models that restrict
the variety of eBooks available to libraries for purchase, and
conditions under which they may be lent. These restrictions
placed on access to eBooks and other digital content undermine
the independent public interest function of libraries and
relegates them, in effect, to market access points for
publishers. The 2013 Study on the Application of Directive
2001/29/EC on Copyright & Related Rights in the Information
Society,26

STUDY ON THE APPLICATION OF DIRECTIVE 2001/29/EC ON COPYRIGHT
AND RELATED RIGHTS IN THE INFORMATION SOCIETY (16 December
2013)http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/copyright/docs/studies/131216_study_en.pdf

commissioned by the European Commission, recognizes the need to
preserve the autonomy of libraries:

“Fundamentally, in our opinion, the traditional role of
libraries in providing an alternative to get access to cultural
content should be preserved in the digital environment and their
mission should be extended to the provision of e-books and other
digital content. To that end, their autonomy should be
preserved. Relying only on the market to deliver e-books to
library readers could potentially dictate unreasonable terms
and conditions to libraries or transform public lending into
another commercial service provided by the publishers.”27

Ibid 343

If the practice of withholding eBooks from libraries
continues,publishers/authors should be required in legislation
to make eBooks available to libraries under reasonable terms
and conditions.28

above n 16.

IFLA’s Principles for eLending set out the problems to be
overcome, and ways in which they can be solved:29

Ibid.

A library must have the right to license and/or purchase any
commercially available eBook without embargo.If titles are
withheld from the library market by publishers and/or
authors,nationallegislation should require such access under
reasonable terms and conditions. Libraries must be able to
determine their own acquisitions by choosing specific titles
from publisher or distributor listings in support of their
mandate to provide community access to information and
knowledge.

A library must have access to eBooks under reasonable terms and
conditions and at a fair price.Terms of access should be
transparent and costs predictable to enable the library to
operate within its budget and funding cycles.

eBook licensing/purchase options must respect copyright
limitations and exceptions available to libraries and their
users in national law, such as the right to:

Copy a portion of the work

Re-format the work for preservation purposes if it is licensed
and/or purchased for permanent access

Provide a temporary copy of the work to another library in
response to a user request

Reformat a work to enable access for people with print
disabilities

By- pass a technological protection measure for the purpose of
exercising any non-infringing purpose.

eBooksavailable to libraries should be platform neutral and
developed with standards for accessibility. Content should be
capable of integration into library systems and online public
access catalogues, and interoperable across platforms,
applications and e-reader devices that the library or library
patron has chosen to invest in.

Strategies must be in place to ensure the long term preservation
of eBook titles by libraries.Long term availability of eBook
titles should not be compromised by factors such as a publisher
ceasing to operate.This can be addressed through measures
includingthe collaborative development of archival databases by
publishers and libraries andlegislative solutions which require
the legal deposit of digital content with specified agencies.

eBook services must protect the privacy of library
users.Libraries and their users must be able to make informed
decisions about the control and use of personal information
including reading choices.

Text and Data Mining

53(a). [In particular if you are an end user/consumer or an
institutional user:] Have you experienced obstacles, linked to
copyright, when trying to use text or data mining methods,
including across borders?

Yes.30

IFLA’s response reflects the input of its EU members

A number of IFLA members have cited licence terms and
conditions, technological protection measures and more
generally, gaps in digitized resources available, as barriers
to text and data mining activities. EU-based members comment on
specific text and data mining challenges encountered in their
submission.

Some examples of licence terms and conditions which restrict or
prohibit text and data mining activities have been provided by
IFLA members.31

The identify of institutions providing licence examples has been
anonymized.

One member has provided excerpts from a license for access to
Online ProQuest databases, which contains the following
conditions:

“Downloading of all or parts of a Product in a systematic or
regular manner or so as to create a collection of materials
comprising all or a material subset of a Product is strictly
prohibited whether such collection is in electronic or print
form.”

The licence further stipulates, under the heading “Systems
Usage”:

“To protect the Products for the research and educational use
of Authorized Users, automated searches against ProQuest’s
systems are not permitted with the exception of nonburdensome
federated search services. Data mining is prohibited.”

Another example licence condition provided by an IFLA member
states that,

“Neither the Licensee nor Authorized Users may systematically
make print or electronic copies of multiple extracts of the
Licensed material for anypurpose other than temporary caching
as permitted in Para. 3.1.1”

Another licence contained a prohibition against “mak[ing] mass,
automated or systematic extractions from or hard copy storage
of the Licensed Material.”

54. If there are problems, how would they best be solved?

55. If your view is that a legislative solution is needed, what
would be its main elements? Which activities should be covered
and under what conditions?

In December 2013, IFLA published its Statement on Text and Data
Mining, which calls for text and data mining to be facilitated
by copyright exceptions.32

International Federation of Library Associations & Institutions,
Statement on Text and Data Mining
(2013)http://www.ifla.org/publications/ifla-statement-on-text-and-data-mining-2013

“The technical act of copying involved in the process of TDM
falls by accident, not intention, within the complexity of
copyright laws – in fact, analysis of facts and data has been
the basis of learning for millennia. As TDM simply employs
computers to “read” material and extract facts one already has
the right as a human to read and extract facts from, it is
difficult to see how the technical copying by a computer can be
used to justify copyright and database laws regulating this
activity.”

If a researcher or research institution has lawfully acquired
digital content, including databases, the right to read should
encompass the right to mine.

The lack of legal certainty for researchers and innovators
undertaking TDM in the EU stands to significantly affect
investment in research and development, and global
competitiveness. A 2012 study by global consultancy firm Booz &
Co considered the impact of changes to copyright law on early
stage investment in internet or digital content
intermediaries.33

Booz&Co, The Impact of US Internet Copyright Regulations on
Early-Stage Investment
(2012a)http://www.booz.com/media/uploads/BoozCo-Impact-US-Internet-Copyright-Regulations-Early-Stage-Investment.pdf

Based on a survey of angel investors and venture capitalists in
the US and EU, Booz & Co found that 80% of US and 87% of EU
angel investors indicated they were uncomfortable investing in
an R&D area with an uncertain or unduly restrictive regulatory
framework.34

Ibid.

Australian consultancy Lateral Economics reached a similar
finding in their 2012 study into the economic impacts of
flexible exceptions, concluding that investors were valuing
reduced risk and uncertainty from copyright exceptions and
limitations at around $2 billion per year.35

Lateral Economics, Excepting the Future: Internet Intermediary
Activities and the case for flexible copyright exceptions and
extended safe harbour provisions (August 2012), 38.

Libraries offer researchers and innovators with legal access to
a rich array of resources capable of being mined and analysed
to facilitate new scientific, economic and creative
discoveries. Currently, researchers with access to library
collections in countries including Israel, Taiwan, South Korea,
the United States and Singapore stand at a competitive advantage
over their counterparts in the EU, with TDM facilitated in those
countries by flexible, open-ended exceptions. IFLA observes the
irony in the fact that due to the Berne Convention and the
international nature of copyright law that citizens,
researchers and companies in those countries are able to text
and data mine content produced by Europeans that Europeans
themselves are not able to, without permission.

A 2012 UK study commissioned by JISC found that if text mining
enabled just a 2% increase in productivity – corresponding to
only 45 minutes per academic per working week, this would
result in additional productivity worth between 123.5m GBP and
156.8 GBP in working time per year.36

D McDonald and U Kelly, Value and benefits of text mining,
prepared for JISC
(2012)http://www.jisc.ac.uk/sites/default/files/value-text-mining.pdf

In their submission to the UK Government Review of Intellectual
Property in 2012, the British Library noted:

“It is estimated that for every pound invested by the
government in R&D, in the form of funding of the research
councils, this returns somewhere between £9 and £17 to the
British economy. That is to say £3.5 billion translates into
between £30 - £60 billion worth of GDP. Given the size of the
education and R&D markets, it is therefore probably reasonable
to assume that even small and incremental improvements upstream
to the sector’s ability to reuse knowledge in the form of
copyright works, will downstream lead to a significant
andmeaningful growth in GDP. In an internationally competitive
environment where for example the US is seeking to double
public funding in R&D over the next 10 years, any gains in
efficiencies that the this country can make in the sphere of
research are gains that will translate into GDP growth.”37

British Library, Response to HM Government Consultation on
Copyright. (March 2012)
3http://pressandpolicy.bl.uk/imagelibrary/downloadMedia.ashx?MediaDetailsID=1423(internal
citations removed).

IFLA believes that in the rapidly evolving digital environment,
taking into account the diversity of TDM applications and
sources from which data can be extracted, text and data mining
would be best facilitated by a flexible, open ended exception.

In the alternative, IFLA cautiously supports a purpose-based
exception but warns against undue restrictions on the kinds of
text and data mining activities that would be permitted.
Restricting text and data mining activities to non commercial
uses, for example, will impact on public research activities
undertaken in partnership with private investors. It can
prevent researchers from certain publication or application of
the results of TDM, and is vulnerable to overly restrictive
interpretation by licensors. It will also prevent TDM by EU
technology companies at a time when the Commission is quite
rightly supporting activities to encourage EU SMEs.

It is worth briefly commenting as to why a licensing approach
fails to fully realise the opportunities offered by TDM.
Licences pose jurisdictional and structural challenges to
researchers seeking to undertake TDM. A great number of
licences are limited in application; they do not facilitate
cross border uses of licensed material. In addition, licences
deter early exploration of new TDM opportunities. A researcher,
faced with the need to purchase and fulfil the requirements of a
licence before undertaking a new project involving TDM, may be
deterred from embarking on that project by the administrative
hurdles to be overcome.

More profoundly, IFLA has grave concerns with any proposed TDM
solution that in effect controls how a researcher can read and
analyse data it already has legal access to. But for the
incidental copying of underlying source content involved in
‘computer reading’ or TDM, publishers would have no basis on
which to claim additional payment. The source content (i.e.
legally purchased access to a database) remains unchanged; it
is merely the new technology that enables publishers to impose
an access toll, in effect, on TDM.

Responsibilities of internet intermediaries

76. In particular, is the current legal framework clear enough
to allow for sufficient involvement of intermediaries (such as
Internet service providers, advertising brokers, payment
service providers, domain name registrars, etc.) in inhibiting
online copyright infringements with a commercial purpose? If
not, what measures would be useful to foster the cooperation of
intermediaries?

Any legislation dealing with intermediaries on the internet must
be thoroughly considered and carefully defined so as not to
inadvertently include libraries or educational institutions
where not appropriate.

In the United Kingdom and in New Zealand, recent legislative
reforms to address the responsibilities of intermediaries have
included definitions that encompass internet services provided
by libraries - much to the concern of IFLA member libraries in
those countries.

United Kingdom

The UK Digital Economy Act introduced in 2010 places obligations
on Internet Service Providers (ISPs) to respond to online
infringement under an “Initial Obligations Code” and a
subsequent “Technical Obligations Code”.38

Ss 3-16,Digital Economy Act2010 (UK)

The core definitions of “ISP”, “subscriber” and “communications
provider” in the Act have been criticized by UK library
associations as overly simplistic, and not reflecting the more
complex intermediated internet provision that exists in
educational institutions and libraries39

http://www.sconul.ac.uk/news/act-risks-limiting-internet-access-in-libraries-schools-and-universities

. Discussions between Ofcom, the regulator responsible for UK
communications industries, and libraries and educational
institutions in 2010 seemed to confirm that under those
definitions, libraries could be treated as both an “Internet
Service Provider” and a “subscriber”.

“Under the Act libraries would be treated the same as an
individual at home going online. A library acting as an
intermediary, providing internet access to hundreds if not
thousands of people is fundamentally different from you or I
going online at home. This isn't about excluding libraries from
the Act, it isn't about breaking copyright law or endorsing
piracy - it's about recognising libraries' unique role by
creating an exception within the Act - which Ofcom are
perfectly able to do. Ofcom are already creating an exception
for commercial suppliers of WiFi for example."40

Phil Bradley, President of Chartered Institute of Library and
Information Professionals, ibid.

As an ISP, libraries stood to be responsible for the monitoring
of their networks for copyright infringement, with significant
financial burden. As a subscriber, libraries stood bound to act
on notifications from their ISP to the effect that a copyright
owner has made a report against them for alleged copyright
infringement. Compliance with the stated obligations under the
Digital Economy Act meant significant financial and resource
burdens for libraries, and raised more fundamental concerns
regarding freedom of access to information and patron privacy,
two core values to library practice.

New Zealand

In New Zealand, theCopyright (Infringing File Sharing) Amendment
Act2011, which defines responsibilities of intermediaries
dealing with copyright infringement, came into effect in
September 2011.41

For fixed-line operators; it will come into effect for mobile
providers from October 2015: Copyright (Infringing File
Sharing) Amendment Act 2011 (N.Z.) s 2; Copyright Act 1994
(N.Z.) s 122S (as amended by Copyright (Infringing File Sharing
and Cellular Mobile Networks) Order 2013 (N.Z.) s 3

It replaced the widely criticized section 92A of theCopyright
(New Technologies) Amendments Act2008, which included a
definition of “ISP” that encompassed all organisations
providing internet access, including schools and libraries.
While the new section 122(a) revised the scope of application
of the legislation to capture only traditional ISPs, there is
some concern it may, in part, still touch on internet services
provided by public interest institutions like libraries.42

Pheh Hoon Lim and Louise Longdin,P2P online file sharing:
transnational convergence and divergence in balancing
stakeholder interests33(11) EUROPEAN INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY
REVIEW 690, 692 (2011)

IFLA supports appropriate and effective measures to fight
unauthorized peer to peer file sharing, and to protect the
rights of content creators. It has long been part of library
practice to educate patrons on permitted use of copyright
materials, and respect for the rights of creators. IFLA
cautions strongly, however, that any legislative measures
regarding responsibilities of internet intermediaries fully
take into account the diversity of private and public bodies
providing internet access, and the importance of these
services.

