


[-- Image: Picture 1 --]scan3 Kingly Court, London W1B 5PW

Tel 020 7437 4383

Registered in England no. 142378

President: Lord PuttnamCBE

Public Consultation on the Review of EU CopyrightRules2014

Register ID    Mark Batey, Chief Executive,Film Distributors’
Association

Type of Respondent Film Distribution – FDA is thetrade bodyfor
UK theatrical filmdistributors

Contact:  MBatey@fda.uk.net

FDA, 3 Kingly Court, London W1B 5PW. Tel +44 207 437 4383

Date:  26thFebruary 2014

Total 4 pages

About FDA

Film Distributors’ Association (FDA)is the trade body
forUKtheatrical film distributors, the companies that release
filmsincinemas and promote them toaudiences. Thevery diverse
range of UK and internationalfeature films brought to market by
FDA member companies account for 99% of UK cinema admissions.FDA
is a member of the International Federation of Film
Distributors’ Associations (FIAD), British Screen Advisory
Council (BSAC) and the UK-based Alliance for Intellectual
Property.Lord Puttnam of QueensgateCBEis FDA’s President.

About our sector

Theatrical film distribution is a sophisticated, competitive and
dynamic business that depends on product and the extent to which
it connects with audiences.With 1% of the global population, the
UK generatesaround6% of global cinema box-office receipts
(£1.1billion from165.5millionadmissions in 2013).FDA’s diverse
membership comprises the innovators and entrepreneurs who take
financial risks to enable content creation, and who rely on IP
protection and enforcement to ensure their future investments.

Overall, the sector operates successfully and delivers a
significant contribution to the economy in terms of revenue and
jobs, as well as the consequent cultural and creative impacts.
An economic multiplier effect applies: for every £1 spent on
cinema tickets,a further £3+is pumped into the UK economy on
directly related expenditure.

The audio-visual sector makes a vital cultural and economic
contribution to the European economy.It also plays a
significant role in achieving the community’s public policy
objective of ensuring cultural diversity.This has been achieved
within the framework of the
Copyrightdirective;anysignificantchangeshavethe potential
toharm the interests of the sector and its consumers.

As an industry trade body, many of the individual questions
contained in this consultation fall outside FDA’sfocusedremit.
Buton behalf of our members(and as consumers),we are eager to
makethe followingessentialpoints:

Cultural diversity

FDAwouldcaution that there is a very real danger of doing
irreparable damage to Europe’s creative industries,and
theimportantpublic policy objective of ensuring cultural
diversity,if changestotheEUcopyright frameworkare instituted on
the basis of anything less than the most rigorous evidence
thatany and allpotential modifications are absolutely
essential.The strengthand breadthof Europe’s creative
economy,and thedynamicfilm sector in particular,
demonstratethat copyrightisfundamentallyfit forpurpose.

Not only are Europe’s creative industries increasingly and
consistently buoyant,they are
alsoinfluentialinternationally.Films which could only be made
in Europe by European film-makers primarily for European
audiences are securing audiences worldwide,exporting a
diversity of European cultural influencesto international
acclaim,which in turn impact positively on the EU’s economy.In
recent years, many European films such asThe Hunt,Amour,A
HijackingandTheArtisthave been released to UK cinema audiences.
Copyrightenables rights-holders to effectivelyengage with
audiencesand efficiently licence contentto meet commercial
demands.

On behalf of our sector, FDA is veryconcerned that there is a
misplaced belief thatsubstantialchanges to the present
copyright system are neededin orderto achieve pan-European
digital services.There is noevidence that this is the case.In
fact, all available evidence suggests that it is far from the
reality.

In 2014 consumers in the EU have legal access to more copyright
content across more devices than ever before.Thousandsof legal
audio-visual services are availableonline. Consumer spending on
such services in Europehas increased exponentially overthe last
two to three years. Furthermore, there arenumerous ways in
which audio-visual works are legally
accessibleacrossterritories, including electronic-sell-through
and servicesofferedby localprovidersenablingtheirsubscribers to
access content on mobile devicesregardless of location. We
believe this demonstratesthat such servicescan
developeffectively within theexistingEU copyright
framework.Whilst many services are territorially-based, there
is no evidence thattheycould not belicensedcommercially across
territories if the right commercial (rather than regulatory)
conditionsapplied.

A commercial imperativemustexist for service providers
toconsider operatingdigital services within,let alone across,
territories.As a starting point, theymustbe able to
engagelocallyin whichever territory or territories they
operate,to commercially exploit the licenses acquired.It should
be noted that many of the largest,mostestablished service
providers launch and operate on a territory by territory basis.

Wider issues unrelated to copyright

Furthermore, there are a number of fundamental barriers to a
digital single market, which are completely unrelated to
copyright. These include but are not limited to:

Insufficient consumer demand to demonstrate the necessary
incentives to commercial business to provide viable services
across Europe (or parts thereof);

As a matter of practicality, evidence demonstrates that
consumers favour nationally based services which reflect
sharedcultural and linguistic tastes;

Different regulations, includingVAT, consumer protection
andclassification systems forchildprotection;

Technological differences:availability of devices, lack of
digital infrastructure/access to high speed broadband and other
networks;

Payment- and particularly micropayment-processors;

Investment to market such services.

The diversity of the potential European audience itself is a
further factorto be considered. Contentmust be localised to
meet the demands in different communities both national and
cultural, and exploitationefforts have to be customised to
engage with these different audiences. It is definitelynota
‘one size fits all’ proposition.The provision or expansion of
services within territories or across territories is
abusinessmatter decided with the usual commercial
considerations on a case by case basis. Copyright isnota
barrier.In many cases licences could be acquired if the
services were there to exploit the content successfully.

The EU already has a strong, diverse creative sector

The EU regulatory environment, including applicable copyright
legislation, has played a vital role in the formation of one of
the strongest, mostdiverse creative sectors in the world.The
financial and cultural contribution that the creative
sector,and film industry in particular,makes to the EU economy
in terms of revenue, employment and diversityis entirely
reliant on the ability to continue to produce creative worksand
connect themeffectivelywith audiences. Copyrightunderpins this
entireprocess.

The ability of rights-holders to protect their copyright is
vital to the success of their businessesandto the wider
creative industries in the UKand Europe.Potential changes to
the copyright frameworkriskincreasing uncertainty for investors
and making funding harder to secure.It is thereforeessential
that any changes to the copyright regime are made on the basis
of strong, independent evidence. Changes made on any other
basiswouldrisk undermining the success of the European film
industry, which relies on a fair copyright framework to secure
the return on investment essential for further filmmaking.There
is a real danger that any changes impacting on the current
licensing modelswouldirrevocably damage the existing financing
model for independent film production and distribution across
the EU.

Film production and distribution is a high-risk,
high-stakesendeavour.Significant investment is required in
terms ofbothfinance and time forallproductions,whether low
budget or high concept. Even if a film gets produced there is
no guarantee that, by the time it reaches the screen,it will
engage an audience.Film-makers and distributors require a
degree of clairvoyance to be able to predict what an audience
will want to see insay twoor more usually threeyears’ time.The
world can change during the production and distribution of a
film.

In order to attract the funds needed, film-makers have to be
able to offer exclusive exploitation rights in different
territories across the world, not only Europe.Independent films
rely almost totally on funding models for production based on
joint-ventures(co-productions andco-financing deals) across
European territoriesand often with other international
partnerswhich, in turn,are thenleveraged against rights split
across territories.

A production or financing partner will provide funding in return
for exclusive rights to sell, licence, distribute or broadcast a
title in different territories and/or different
languages,ondifferent platforms or at different times.The value
of such rights would be substantially diminished(or even
rendered worthless)if their exclusivity was to be diluted.It is
a highly-developed, but fragile, financing model which has
worked to enable European audio-visual producers to produce
works of wide cultural diversity,makingvaluable contributionsto
thedevelopment offilm audiences worldwide. The financing model
is facilitated by the EU copyright framework which allows
producers to licence their works according to demand.

Similarly, filmdistributionrequires substantial investments for
both product acquisition and bringing completed titles to
market.Distribution is highly competitive and very expensive,
with most films failing to recoup marketing costs during
theatrical release.In 2013, in the UK alone distributors
invested more than £300 million in(mostly digital)film prints
and advertising aloneto support therelease of 700 titles into
cinemas. This level of investmentcan only beaccessed and
sustainedif secured against exclusive exploitation rights.

The current framework of copyright legislation provides
certainty for rights-holders.Itenables them to secure the
investment essential to make and release films
commercially.Ultimately, threats to a returnon that investment
will result in fewer films being made and released and, in
turn, a decline in revenues and diversity.

Territoriality is not a copyright issue

Territorial licensing –individually oracross multiple
territories –isnota copyright issue.Rather,it is
acommercialdecision for rights-holders, similar to any other
commercial decision routinely taken in the course of
competitive business.As noted, copyright is simply the
mechanismenablingthe licensing regime to operate effectively.

As atrade body, FDAhas noinvolvementin the
licensingactivitiesofindividual film distributors.However, our
understanding from publically availabletrade reports and
publicationsis thattruedemand,beyondterritories with shared
language or cultural ties, isverylimited,andvariesacross
different forms of content.The practical reality is that where
there is sufficient demand to attract the investment necessary
to make multi-territory licensing profitable, rights-holders
will licencethecontent.

Torelease contentacrossterritories, distributorsmustbe able to
operate on a large-enough scale to be commercially
effective.This inevitablyfavours
largerinternationalcompanies,which may notnecessarilyresult
inachievingthe public policyaimof cultural diversity asfullyas
in a landscape where the inherentdivisibilityand flexibilityof
copyright isencouraged.

Accessibility

UKfilmdistributors have been addressing accessibility issues for
more than 15 years,in an on-going effort to engage or re-engage
cinemagoers with hearing and sight loss.

The transition from 35mm film to digital projection, funded in
large part by distributors, hasbroadenedopportunities to
address accessibility issues. At any given time, most if not
all of the top ten theatrical releasesare now supplied
tocinemaexhibitors withdigitalsubtitles for the
hearing-impaired and audio-descriptive tracks for the
visually-impaired. Accessible screenings are scheduled at
exhibitors’ discretion.

Theindustry’s commitment to greater accessibilitycontinues in
various ways.Most recently distributors have been working with
educationalists to provide screenings of appropriate films for
young people with autism.

Conclusion

All rights-holders, large and small,existto ensure that their
creative worksare made available to consumers inthe most
commercially effective,efficient ways. The wide diversity of
audio-visualworks from European distributors are funded and
exploited intheirhome territories beforeseeking expansion into
other member states;for the reasons already stated,this is most
effectively exploited territorially.

Where and whenthere issustainabledemand for multi-territory
licensing, the existing copyright
frameworkalreadyfacilitatesagreements between rights-holders
and services providers.As with other commercial issues, the
solution to wider availability of services in Europe lies
withdemand. Copyright does not prevent multi-territory
licensing;it simply enables rights-holdersto respond
toconsumerdemand and to exercise their right to manage the
exploitation of their creative worksinthe physicalanddigital
worlds.

Thank you for the opportunity to participate in your
consultation.

