


EU-Copyright Consultation

4-7 (crossborder-availability):As long as the provider of an
online service pays an adequate remuneration for
theexploitationof the rights incopyrighted works to theproducer
and I participate on the income in an adequate way, there is no
reason to limit the license to a certain territory.However, it
is the decision of the service providerin the first placeto
limithisservice to certain territories. This businesschoice
ismainlydue to economical aspects,local interestsand the
quality of broadband coverage in therespectivecountry.

10 (2rightsfor 1 use):In the offline-world in broadcasting
(broadcasting rights, mechanical rights for a broadcast) the
practice oflicensingtwo rights for one exploitationexists for a
long timeand has not caused any problems so far. With regard to
the “online-rights” for online exploitations, I
havenotexperienced any
difficultiesinthelicensingpracticeeither.

11 (Hyperlink):Everybody who embedsmy work from my website
e.g.in his website in such a manner that the user of this other
website is not led to my website, exploits my work for hisown
benefits. I have no benefitfrom that, since the user does not
visit my website.But the benefit of the embedder is enormous,
because his website becomes more attractivefor visits. In case
the embedder generates revenues from advertisement on his
website or other revenues, the embedder even has a direct
financial benefit.I believe that for this indirect or direct
benefits from the usage of my creations,the embeddershould be
obliged to providethe rightholderswith an adequate
remuneration.

14 (resale of digital files):Digital files can be reproduced
much easier than tangible data carriersand without the loss of
quality. Therefore, there is a high risk that the resale of
digital files, such as mp4/AV-files ofaudiovisualworks, would
lead to massive misuse. Numerous unauthorized digital copies
could be sold as alleged originals. How is the purchaser to
know, if he bought the original or only a copy of the digital
file? Since the quality of the digital copy is identical with
the quality of the original,the resale of declared copies of
digital files within a declared “2ndhand service”, in which
copies naturally would be sold for a cheaper price, would
result in an inexorable drop of the price for the originals.
Not only would cause this immense financial harm
forfilm-producers and -authors, but also for online service
providers.

20 (terms of copyright):Copyright in no way hinders that a work
is exploited or used for the creation of another work.
Copyright merelyprovides the rightholder with an adequate
remuneration for the usage of his/her work. The shortening of
the copyright term would harm not only thefilm-authors, but
also thefilmindustry. Who would benefit from the shortening of
the copyright term?Truly only those, whoexploit copyright
protected content without being willing to pay for the
exploitation of such content. It should not be forgotten in
this context that the protection of intellectual property is a
human right(Art 17/2 of the EU Charta)!

58-63(User generated content):I believe that I asrightholder
shall be the one entitled to decide about who exploits my works
and in what manner the exploitation of my works occurs. Mainly,
I do not want my works being exploited together with content or
inacontext I cannot identify myself with.E.g. ifmy film gets
synched with a song bya right-winged-extremist group, I as
rightholder should have the right to prohibit suchausage.
BesidesthatIbelieveitisunfair, if someone else makes money with
myworksand I have no financial benefit from that. Online
Services thatfinancially benefit from users, who produce and
upload videos containingworks that donot belong to theminlarge
quantitiesand who do thatfor free, should be obliged to
remuneratethe producers andfilm authorsofthe exploited works!

65(remuneration for private copying):The licensing of
online-services, e.g. of a download store(iTunes, Flimmit in
Austria), where the download is licensed by rightholders and
the payment of levies for the subsequent private copies of
those downloads that are made by consumers are not mutually
exclusive. The license enables the provider of online-services
to allow theconsumerto download digital files. Whereas
theprivate copying levy is a compensation for the private
copies the consumer makes of that download. Therefore, what is
licensed by a service provider is different from what is
subject to private copying levies. The licensing and the
application of private copying levies can and shall co-exist.

72(fair remuneration):In those areas of exploitation, where I
asrightholder have nooverview of who exploits my works and how
often my works are exploited due to the multiple users existing
in Austria and abroad and due to the diversity of technical
possibilities for exploitation, I believe that collective
management is the best model to ensure fair remuneration.Also
as a film-author I want to be remunerated for the online-usage
of my works in an adequate way.

