
Question 71 - If you have identified specific problems with the current
functioning of the levy system, how would these problems best be solved?



We have seen previously that the work and subject matters have a tendency
to be more and more dematerialized and that consumers, in a world which is
becoming global and where mobility is the new paradigm, wish ubiquitous
fruition of music, video and written works.

Be it for phonograms, videograms or printed material, the availability of
dematerialized electronic files becomes increasingly important in the
business model of a work. This is why rightholders have negotiated
agreements in order to make their work available in a dematerialized form.
In France, for instance, publishing contracts must include a digitized
version of the written work or else the author can withdraw from the
contract.

In the video world, at an international level, we have seen the appearance
of the Ultraviolet business model which gives access to a digital version
of the purchased videogram that the consumer can stream or download on any
of his/her screens. The Ultraviolet videos can be bought online or on a
physical disc (DVD, BluRay) and the digital version can be stored on a
personalized library in the cloud. The price of the product includes a
licence fee allowing up to 5 members of the family to watch the videogram
each on their own devices. This corresponds -in fact- to a private copying
right granted to the family circle and covered by a licensing fee included
in the price of the work. The same business model applies to music
platforms such as iTunes or Amazon MP3 where customers, once they have
bought a piece of music or an album, can  listen to it either by streaming
it from the cloud or downloading it on personal players. In the price of
the phonogram is included the right to download (and thus private copy) the
phonogram onto a certain number of devices (10 devices for Amazon, for
instance). Therefore the right to copy is already taken into consideration
in the price of the work and transformed from an exception to the copyright
into a licence, i.e. an exclusive right, taking into account a fair
compensation of the harm caused to rightholders by the copies.



The above analyzed tendencies, lead us to plead for a generalisation of a
system where a withholding licence, taking into account fair compensation
of the harm caused to authors, interpreters and producers by natural
persons copying works for their private use, would be levied directly on
the work and subsequently transferred onto its selling price.

This approach has been put forward in France, amongst others, by Professor
of Law Pierre-Yves Gautier  who has expressed the need for a total overhaul
of the private copying levies’ system in France. He has suggested that
private copying levies be imposed on works (phonograms, videograms, written
works, etc.)  rather than on recording/storage media.



SECIMAVI fully agrees with this approach which not only accommodates the
increasing dematerialization of works and the need expressed by consumers
for ubiquitous consumption, but also solves a number of delicate issues
that the actual French private copying levies’ system raises.



First of all this system would guarantee that only the works acquired
licitly by the consumer would be imposed. In fact the private copy levy
would be applied at the moment where the sale is finalized and the price
paid by the buyer. Illicit downloading would therefore not be included in
the private copying levies’ fair compensation, as has been the case in
France up to a relatively recent past.



This way, when a natural person buys a work, he/she will compensate
directly the author for his/her right of copying this work for private use.



This solution presents numerous advantages :



For rightholders:

●     The assurance that their rights are preserved;

●     A right to private copying systematically levied each time a work is
sold. This would avoid losing private copying levies when a storage media
does not fall under the scope of private copying in a country (example :
PCs are not submitted to private copying levies in France, therefore
artists do not get a compensation for files acquired and stored only on a
PC)

●     Redistribution of private copying levies amongst rightholders would
be managed directly by collective societies who already deal with
collective rights management and have the experience and the processes in
place to organize their repartition;

●     Collective societies would no longer be compelled to manage
exonerations / reimbursements of professional buyers or reimbursements in
case of re-exported goods;

●     Collected sums would be strictly connected to purchases on the
national territory, avoiding losses of fair compensation induced by today’s
grey market on storage media (see the example of external HDDs and CDs/DVDs
given in answer to question 64 (point 4) and by storage of works in the
cloud, which is presently not submitted to private copying levies in France

●     The questioning about how cloud storage could contribute to private
copy levies would lose sense, because each work acquired legally and stored
in the cloud would have paid its licence to private copying;



For consumers :

●     More transparency, as consumers would be better informed on the price
paid to authors for the ‘fair compensation’ of private copying. This price
would be directly linked to the work acquired legally;

●     The distinction between professional and non professional buyers,
which is linked today to the purchase of storage media, would lose sense,
as only the acquirer of a protected work would be subject to private
copying levies;

●     A more equitable system for consumers as 100% of the private copying
levies would be linked to the copied works which is not the case today. In
fact, on the one hand storage/recording media are not necessarily used for
private copying purposes and -on the other end- some private copying
tariffs in France take into consideration  categories of copies  which
should be excluded, as for instance : DRM copy protected media (DVDs for
instance), which are by definition uncopyable; trailers, which only have a
promotional objective; and car radios for which no private copying habits
are actually accounted for.



For professional users :

●     Professional users of storage/recording media wouldn’t have to pay in
advance undue private copying levies;

●     They would therefore experience a significant reduction in
administrative charges linked to the management of exoneration or
reimbursements applications;

●     Present reimbursement difficulties for professional users would be
overcome.



For the Member States :

●     Competition’s distortions caused by grey market issues amongst Member
States would be avoided . As evoked in the answer to question 64 in point
4., differences in prices of storage/recording media, engendered by
differences in private copying levies amongst Member States, cause grey
markets because the consumers can buy on internet sites goods at much lower
prices in some Member States than in others, and actually do so. Member
States with the higher private copying levies systems, France in our
example, lose both VAT and corporation taxes without mentioning the
negative impact on employment brought about by the loss of competitivity in
certain consumer electronics markets

●     This solution could rapidly lead to an harmonisation of private
copying levies throughout Member States as a number of prices on phonograms
and videograms, for instance prices on online music, are already
transnational and could all increase by the same degree



The solution advocated by SECIMAVI would imply modifications on the
Intellectual Property Laws of Member States but we think that the
simplifications and advantages brought about by this approach for all
categories of stakeholders - rightholders, consumers, professional users
and Member States- are worth the effort.

