


Public Consultation

on the review of the EU copyright rules

Contents

I.  Introduction  2

A.  Context ofthe consultation  2

B.  How to submit replies to this questionnaire  3

C.  Confidentiality  3

II.  Rights and the functioning of the Single Market  7

A.  Why is it not possible to access many online content
services from anywhere in Europe?  7

B.  Is there a need for more clarity as regards the scope of
what needs to be authorised (or not) in digital transmissions?
10

1.  The act of “making available”  10

2.  Two rights involved in a single act of exploitation  11

3.  Linking and browsing  12

4.  Download to own digital content  13

C.  Registration of works and other subject matter – is it a
good idea?  14

D.  How to improve the use and interoperability ofidentifiers
15

E.  Term of protection – is it appropriate?  15

III.  Limitations and exceptions in the Single Market  16

A.  Access to content in libraries andarchives  19

1.  Preservation and archiving  19

2.  Off-premises access to library collections  20

3.  E – lending  21

4.  Massdigitisation  22

B.  Teaching  23

C.  Research  25

D.  Disabilities  25

E.  Text and data mining  27

F.  User-generated content  28

IV.  Private copying and reprography  31

V.  Fair remuneration of authors and performers  33

VI.  Respect for rights  34

VII.  A single EU Copyright Title  36

VIII.  Other issues  36

Introduction

Context of the consultation

Over the last two decades, digital technology and the Internet
have reshaped the ways in which content iscreated, distributed,
and accessed. New opportunities have materialised for those that
create and produce content (e.g. a film, a novel, a song), for
new and existing distribution platforms, for institutions such
as libraries, for activities such as research and for citizens
who now expect to be able to access content – for information,
education or entertainment purposes – regardless of
geographical borders.

This new environment also presents challenges. One of them is
for the market to continue to adaptto new forms of distribution
and use. Another one is for the legislator to ensure that the
system of rights, limitations to rights and enforcement remains
appropriate and is adapted to the new environment. This
consultation focuses on the second of these challenges:
ensuring that the EU copyright regulatory framework stays fit
for purpose in the digital environment to support creation and
innovation, tap the full potential of the Single Market, foster
growth and investment in our economy and promote cultural
diversity.

In its "Communication on Content in the Digital Single Market"1

COM (2012)789 final, 18/12/2012.

the Commission set out two parallel tracks of action:on the one
hand, to complete its on-going effort to review and to
modernise the EU copyright legislative framework2

As announced in the Intellectual Property Strategy ' A single
market for Intellectual Property Rights: COM (2011)287 final,
24/05/2011.

3

"Based on market studies and impact assessment and legal
drafting work"as announced in the Communication (2012)789.

with a view to a decision in 2014 on whether to table
legislative reform proposals, andon the other, to facilitate
practical industry-led solutions through the stakeholder
dialogue "Licences for Europe" on issues on which rapidprogress
was deemed necessary and possible.

The "Licences for Europe" process has been finalised now4

See the document “Licences for Europe – tem pledges to bring
more content
online”:http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/copyright/docs/licences-for-europe/131113_ten-pledges_en.pdf.

. The Commission welcomes the practical solutions stakeholders
have put forward in this context and will monitor their
progress. Pledges have been made by stakeholders in all four
Working Groups (cross border portability of services,
user-generated content, audiovisual and film heritage and text
and data mining). Taken together, the Commission expects these
pledges to be a further step in making the user environment
easier in many different situations. The Commission also takes
note of the fact that two groups – user-generated content and
text and datamining – did not reach consensus among
participating stakeholders on either the problems to be
addressed or on the results. The discussions and results of
"Licences for Europe" will be also taken into account in the
context of the review of the legislative framework.

As part of the review process, the Commission is now launching a
public consultation on issues identified in the Communication on
Content in the Digital Single Market, i.e.:"territoriality in
the Internal Market, harmonisation, limitations and exceptions
to copyright in the digital age; fragmentation of the EU
copyright market; and how to improve the effectiveness and
efficiency of enforcement while underpinning its legitimacy in
the wider context of copyright reform". As highlighted in the
October 2013 European CouncilConclusions5

EUCO 169/13, 24/25 October 2013.

"Providing digital services and content across the single market
requires the establishment of a copyright regime for the digital
age. The Commission will therefore complete its on-going review
of the EU copyright framework in spring 2014. It is important
to modernise Europe's copyright regime and facilitate
licensing, while ensuring a high level protection of
intellectual property rights and taking into account cultural
diversity".

This consultation builds on previous consultations and public
hearings, in particular those on the "Green Paper on copyright
in the knowledge economy"6

COM(2008)
466/3,http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/copyright/copyright-infso/index_en.htm#maincontentSec2.

, the "Green Paper on the online distribution of audiovisual
works"7

COM(2011) 427
final,http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/consultations/2011/audiovisual_en.htm.

and "Content Online"8

http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/consultations/2009/content_online_en.htm.

. These consultations provided valuable feedback from
stakeholders on a number of questions, on issues as diverse as
the territoriality of copyright and possible ways to overcome
territoriality, exceptions related to the online dissemination
of knowledge, and rightholders’ remuneration, particularly in
the audiovisual sector. Views were expressed by stakeholders
representing all stages in the value chain, including right
holders, distributors, consumers, and academics. The questions
elicited widely diverging views on the best way to proceed. The
"Green Paper on Copyright in the Knowledge Economy" was followed
up by a Communication. The replies to the "Green Paper on the
online distribution of audiovisual works" have fed into
subsequent discussions on the Collective Rights Management
Directive and into the current review process.

How to submit replies to this questionnaire

You are kindly asked to send your repliesby 5 February 2014as a
word or pdf document to the following e-mail address of DG
Internal Market and
Services:markt-copyright-consultation@ec.europa.eu. Please note
that replies sent after that date will not be taken into
account.

This consultation is addressed to different categories of
stakeholders. To the extent possible, the questions indicate
the category/ies of respondents most likely to be concerned by
them (annotation in brackets, before the actual question).
Respondents should nevertheless feel free to reply to any/all
of the questions. Also, please note that, apart from the
question concerning the identification of the respondent, none
of the questions is obligatory. Replies containing answers only
to part of the questions will be also accepted.

You are requested to provide your answers directly within this
consultation document. For the “Yes/No/No opinion” questions
please put the selected answer inboldandunderlineit so it is
easy for us to see your selection.

In your answers to the questions, you are invited to refer to
the situation in EU Member States.You are also invited in
particular to indicate, where relevant, what would be the
impact of options you put forward in terms of costs,
opportunitiesand revenues.

The public consultation is available in English. Responses may,
however, be sent in any of the 24 official languages of the EU.

Confidentiality

The contributions received in this round of consultation as well
as a summary report presenting the responses in a statistical
and aggregated form will be published on the website of DG
MARKT.

Please note that all contributions received will be published
together with the identity of the contributor, unless the
contributor objects to the publication of their personal data
on the grounds that such publication would harm his or her
legitimate interests. In this case, the contribution will be
published in anonymous form upon the contributor's explicit
request. Otherwise the contribution will not be published nor
will its content be reflected in the summary report.

Pleaseread ourPrivacy statement.

Please identify yourself:

Name:

VilleAntero Kadenius

In the interests of transparency, organisations (including, for
example, NGOs, trade associations and commercial enterprises)
are invited to provide the public with relevant information
about themselves by registering in the InterestRepresentative
Register and subscribing to its Code of Conduct.

If you are a Registered organisation, please indicate your
Register ID number below. Your contribution will then be
considered as representing the views of your organisation.

…………………………………………………………………………………………………..

…………………………………………………………………………………………………..

If your organisation is not registered, you have the opportunity
toregister now. Responses from organisations not registered will
be published separately.

If you would like to submit your reply on an anonymous basis
please indicate it belowby underlining the following answer:

Yes, I would like to submit my reply on an anonymous basis

Type of respondent(Pleaseunderlinethe appropriate):

End user/consumer(e.g. internet user, reader, subscriber to
music or audiovisual service, researcher, student) OR
Representative of end users/consumers

for the purposes of this questionnaire normally referred to
in questions as"end users/consumers"

Institutional user(e.g. school, university, research centre,
library, archive) OR Representative of institutional users

for the purposes of this questionnaire normally referred to
in questions as"institutional users"

Author/Performer OR Representative of authors/performers

Publisher/Producer/Broadcaster OR Representative of
publishers/producers/broadcasters

the two above categoriesare,for the purposes of this
questionnaire, normally referred to in questions as"right
holders"

Intermediary/Distributor/Other service provider(e.g. online
music or audiovisual service, games platform, social media,
search engine, ICT industry)OR Representative of
intermediaries/distributors/other service providers

for the purposesof this questionnaire normally referred to in
questions as"service providers"

Collective Management Organisation

Public authority

Member State

Other(Please explain):

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Rightsand the functioning of the Single Market

Why is it not possible to access many online content services
from anywhere in Europe?[The territorial scope of the rights
involved in digital transmissions and the segmentation of the
market through licensing agreements]

Holders of copyright and related rights – e.g. writers, singers,
musicians - do not enjoy a single protection in the EU. Instead,
they are protected on the basis of a bundle of national rights
in each Member State. Those rights have been largelyharmonised
by the existing EU Directives. However, differences remain and
the geographical scope of the rights is limited to the
territory of the Member State granting them. Copyright is thus
territorial in the sense that rights are acquired and
enforcedon a country-by-country basis under national law9

This principle has been confirmed by the Court of justice on
several occasions.

.

The dissemination of copyright-protected content on the Internet
– e.g. by a music streaming service, or by an online e-book
seller – therefore requires, in principle, an authorisation for
each national territory in which the content is communicated to
the public. Rightholders are, of course, in a position to grant
a multi-territorial or pan-European licence, such that content
services can be provided in several Member States and across
borders. A number of steps have been taken at EU level to
facilitate multi-territorial licences: the proposal for a
Directive on Collective Rights Management10

Proposal for a Directive of theEuropean Parliament and of the
Council of 11 July 2012 on collective management of copyright
and related rights and multi-territorial licensing of rights in
musical works for online uses in the internal market, COM(2012)
372 final.

should significantly facilitate the delivery of
multi-territorial licences in musical works for online
services11

Collective Management Organisations play a significant role in
the management of online rights for musical works in contrast
to the situation where online rights are licensed directly by
right holders such as film or record producers or by newspaper
or book publishers.

; the structured stakeholder dialogue “Licences for Europe”12

You can find more information on the following website:
http://ec.europa.eu/licences-for-europe-dialogue/.

and market-led developments such as the on-going work in the
Linked Content Coalition13

You can find more information on the following
website:http://www.linkedcontentcoalition.org/.

.

"Licences for Europe" addressed in particular the specific issue
of cross-border portability, i.e. the ability of consumers
having subscribed to online services in their Member State to
keep accessing them when travelling temporarily to other Member
States. As a result, representatives of the audio-visual sector
issued a joint statement affirming their commitment to continue
working towards the further development of cross-border
portability14

See the document “Licences for Europe – tem pledges to bring
more content
online”:http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/copyright/docs/licences-for-europe/131113_ten-pledges_en.pdf.

.

Despite progress, there are continued problems with the
cross-border provision of, and access to, services. These
problems are most obvious to consumers wanting to access
services that are made available in Member States other than
the one in which they live. Not all online services are
available in all Member States and consumers face problems when
trying to access such services across borders. In some
instances, even if the “same” service is available in all
Member States, consumers cannot access the service across
borders (they can only access their “national” service, and if
they try to access the "same" service in another Member State
they are redirected to the one designatedfor their country of
residence).

This situation may in part stem from the territoriality of
rights and difficulties associated with the clearing of rights
in different territories. Contractual clauses in licensing
agreements between right holders and distributors and/or
between distributors and end users may also be at the origin of
some of the problems (denial of access, redirection).

The main issue at stake here is, therefore, whether further
measures (legislative or non-legislative, including
market-ledsolutions) need to be taken at EU level in the medium
term15

For possible long term measures such as the establishment of a
European Copyright Code (establishing a single title) see
section VII of this consultation document.

to increase the cross-borderavailability of content services in
the Single Market, while ensuring an adequate level of
protection for right holders.

[In particular if you are an end user/consumer:]Have you faced
problems when trying to access online services in an EU Member
State other than the one in which you live?

 YES - Please provide examples indicating the Member State,
the sector and the type of content concerned (e.g. premium
content such as certain films and TV series, audio-visual
content in general, music, e-books,magazines, journals and
newspapers, games, applications and other software)

Today, most content are licensed and distributed on a
territorial basis, which means that the content accessible
varies from one country to another. Therefore, citizens often
haveproblems accessing content from another country, or they
cannot access the same content as citizens in another EU Member
States. It creates unjustified barriers to enjoy cultural goods.
Browsing in youtube I have encountered many, many, many times
the phrase: 'this content is not available in your country'
This is not acceptable in a European single market.

 NO

 NO OPINION

[In particular if you are a service provider:]Have you faced
problems when seeking to provide online services across borders
in theEU?

 YES - Please explain whether such problems, in your
experience, are related to copyright or to other issues (e.g.
business decisions relating to the cost of providing services
across borders, compliance with other laws such as consumer
protection)?Please provide examples indicating the Member
State, the sector and the type of content concerned (e.g.
premium content such as certain films and TV series,
audio-visual content in general, music, e-books, magazines,
journals and newspapers, games, applications and other
software).

There are multiple examples of business that can be launched in
some EU countries and not in others due to copyright
complexities: ● Spotify which was not available in every EU
Member State a full four years after its launch andhad to
undergo long discussions with GEMA (German Collecting Society)
before launching the service in Germany due to excessive fees
requests; ● Netflix and its current situation whereby it faces
very long discussions and negotiations before being able
tolaunch its service in different EU Member States (France
being one example). If you are a service provider that faced
such difficulties, let the European Commission know.

 NO

 NO OPINION

[In particular if you are a right holder or a
collectivemanagement organisation:]How often are you asked to
grant multi-territorial licences? Please indicate, if possible,
the number of requests per year and provide examples indicating
the Member State, the sector and the type of content concerned.


[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

If you have identified problems in the answers to any of the
questions above – what would be the best way to tackle them?

[Open question]

Yes, there are problems. Copyright reform is needed to adapt to
the digital world we live in. The rules must be harmonised to
create a EU digital single market without borders and give EU
citizens the same access to content and services. This means
that innovative services should be ableto flourish and EU
citizens should be able to enjoy those services across the EU.
It is simply unacceptable that getting a digital single market
is so complicated due to digital borders that should not exist
on the Internet and that users and service providers are
constantly wondering if what they do is legal or not. Yes we
want there to be a legal reform, and yes we want a single
European title. this is by far the best way to get legal
certainty for everyone. Copyright harmonization through legal
reform would be the best solution for accessing content all
over Europe.

[In particular if you are a right holder or a collective
management organisation:]Are there reasons why, even in cases
where you hold all the necessary rights for all the territories
inquestion, you would still find it necessary or justified to
impose territorial restrictions on a service provider (in
order, for instance, to ensure that access to certain content
is not possible in certain European countries)?

 YES – Please explain bygiving examples

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO

 NO OPINION

[In particular if you are e.g. a broadcaster or a service
provider:]Are there reasons why, even in cases where you have
acquired all the necessary rights for all the territories in
question, you would still find it necessary or justified to
impose territorial restrictions onthe service recipient (in
order for instance, to redirect the consumer to a different
website than the one he is trying to access)?

 YES – Please explain by giving examples

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO

 NO OPINION

Do you think that further measures (legislative or
non-legislative, including market-led solutions) are neededat
EU level to increase the cross-border availability of content
services in the Single Market, while ensuring an adequate level
of protection for right holders?

 YES – Please explain

copyright reform is needed to adapt to the digital world we live
in. The rules must be harmonised to create a EU digital single
market without borders and give EU citizens the same access to
content and services. This means that innovative services
should be able to flourish and EU citizens should be able to
enjoy those services across the EU It is simply unacceptable
that getting a digital single market is so complicated due to
digital borders that should not exist on the Internet and that
users and service providers are constantly wondering if what
they do is legal or not.Yes we want there to be a legal reform,
and yes we want a single European title. this is by far the best
way to get legal certainty for everyone

 NO – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO OPINION

Is there a need for more clarity as regards the scope of what
needs to be authorised (or not) in digital transmissions?[The
definition of the rights involved in digital transmissions]

The EU framework for the protection of copyright and related
rights inthe digital environment is largely established by
Directive 2001/29/EC16

Directive 2001/29/EC of the European Parliament and of the
Council of 22 May 2001 on the harmonisation of certain aspects
of copyright and related rights in the information society.

on the harmonisation of certain aspects of copyright and related
rights in the information society. OtherEU directives in this
field that are relevant in the online environment are those
relating to the protection of software17

Directive 2009/24/EC of the European Parliament and of the
Council of 23 April 2009 on the legal protection of computer
programs.

and databases18

Directive 96/9/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council
of 11 March 1996 on the legal protection of databases.

.

Directive 2001/29/ECharmonises the rights of authors and
neighbouring rightholders19

Film and record producers, performers and broadcasters are
holders of so-called “neighbouring rights” in, respectively,
their films, records, performances and broadcast. Authors’
content protected by copyright is referred to as a “work” or
“works”, while content protected by neighbouring rights is
referred to as “other subject matter”.

which are essential for the transmission of digital copies of
works (e.g. an e-book) and other protected subject matter (e.g.
a record in a MP3 format) over the internet or similar digital
networks.

The most relevant rights for digital transmissions are the
reproduction right, i.e. the right to authorise or prohibit the
making of copies20

The right to“authorise or prohibit direct or indirect, temporary
or permanent reproduction by any means and in any form, in whole
or in part” (see Art. 2 of Directive 2001/29/EC) although
temporary acts of reproduction of a transient or incidental
nature are, under certain conditions, excluded (see art. 5(1)
of Directive 2001/29/EC).

, (notably relevant at the start of the transmission – e.g. the
uploading of a digital copy of a work to a server in view of
making it available – and at the users’ end – e.g. when a
userdownloads a digital copy of a work) and the communication
to the public/making available right, i.e. the rights to
authorise or prohibit the dissemination of the works in digital
networks21

The right to authorise or prohibit any communication to
thepublic by wire or wireless means and to authorise or
prohibit the making available to the public “on demand” (see
Art. 3 of Directive 2001/29/EC).

. These rights are intrinsically linked in digital transmissions
and both need to be cleared.

The act of “making available”

Directive 2001/29/EC specifies neitherwhatis covered by the
making available right (e.g. the upload, the accessibility by
the public, the actual reception by the public) norwherethe act
of “making available” takes place. This does not raise questions
if the act is limited to a single territory. Questions arise
however when the transmission covers several territories and
rights need to be cleared (does the act of "making available"
happen in the country of the upload only? in each of the
countries where the content is potentially accessible? in each
of the countries where the content is effectively accessed?).
The most recent case law of the Court of Justice of the
European Union (CJEU) suggests that a relevant criterion is the
“targeting”of a certain Member State's public22

See in particular Case C-173/11 (Football Dataco vs Sportradar)
and Case C-5/11 (Donner) for copyright and related rights, and
Case C-324/09 (L’Oréal vs eBay) for trademarks. With regard to
jurisdiction see also joinedCases C-585/08 and C-144/09 (Pammer
and Hotel Alpenhof) and pending CaseC-441/13 (Pez Hejduk); see
however, adopting a different approach, Case C-170/12 (Pinckney
vs KDG Mediatech).

. According to this approach the copyright-relevant act (which
has to be licensed) occurs at least in those countries which
are “targeted” by the online service provider. A service
provider “targets” a group of customers residing in a specific
country when it directs its activity to that group, e.g. via
advertisement, promotions, a language or a currency
specifically targeted at that group.

Is the scope of the “making available” right in cross-border
situations – i.e. when content is disseminated across borders –
sufficiently clear?

 YES

 NO – Please explain how this couldbe clarified and what type
of clarification would be required (e.g. as in "targeting"
approach explained above, as in "country of origin" approach23

The objective of implementing a “country of origin” approach is
to localise the copyright relevant act that must be licenced in
a single Member State (the "country of origin", which could be
for example the Member State in which the content is uploaded
or where the service provider is established), regardless of in
how many Member States the work can be accessed or received.
Such an approach has already been introduced at EU level with
regard to broadcasting by satellite (see Directive 93/83/EEC on
the coordination of certain rules concerning copyright and
rights related to copyright applicable to satellite
broadcasting and cable retransmission).

)

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO OPINION

[In particular if you are a right holder:]Could a clarification
of the territorial scope of the “making available” right havean
effect on the recognition of your rights (e.g. whether you are
considered to be an author or not, whether you are considered
to have transferred your rights or not), on your remuneration,
or on the enforcement of rights (including the availability of
injunctive relief24

Injunctive relief is a temporary or permanent remedy allowing
the right holder to stop or prevent an infringement of his/her
right.

)?

 YES – Please explain how such potential effects could be
addressed

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO

 NO OPINION

Two rights involved in a single act of exploitation

Each act of transmission in digital networks entails (in the
current state of technology and law) several reproductions.
This means that thereare two rights that apply to digital
transmissions: the reproduction right and the making available
right. This may complicate the licensing of works for online
use notably when the two rights are held by different
persons/entities.

[In particular if youa service provider or a right holder:]Does
the application of two rights to a single act of economic
exploitation in the online environment (e.g. a download) create
problems for you?

 YES – Please explain what type of measures would be needed
in order to address such problems (e.g. facilitation of joint
licences when the rights are in different hands, legislation to
achieve the "bundling of rights")

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO

 NO OPINION

Linking andbrowsing

Hyperlinks are references to data that lead a user from one
location in the Internet to another. They are indispensable for
the functioning of the Internet as a network. Several cases are
pending before the CJEU25

Cases C-466/12 (Svensson),C-348/13 (Bestwater International) and
C-279/13 (C More entertainment).

in which the question has been raised whether the provision
ofa clickable link constitutes an act of communication to the
public/making available to the public subject to the
authorisation of the rightholder.

A user browsing the internet (e.g. viewing a web-page) regularly
creates temporary copies of works and other subject-matter
protected under copyright on the screen and in the 'cache'
memory of his computer. A question has been referred to the
CJEU26

Case C-360/13 (Public Relations Consultants Association Ltd).
See
alsohttp://www.supremecourt.gov.uk/decided-cases/docs/UKSC_2011_0202_PressSummary.pdf.

as to whether such copies are always covered by the mandatory
exception for temporary acts of reproduction provided for in
Article 5(1) of Directive 2001/29/EC.

Should the provision of a hyperlink leading to a work or other
subject matter protected under copyright, either in general or
under specific circumstances, be subject to the authorisation
of the rightholder?

 YES – Please explain whether you consider this to be the
case in general, or under specific circumstances, and why

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO – Please explain whether you consider this to be the case
in general, or under specific circumstances, and why (e.g.
because it does not amount to an act of communication to the
public – or to a new public, or because it should be covered by
a copyright exception)

The ability to freely link from one resource to another is one
of the fundamental building blocks of the Internet. Users do it
every day when they post a Facebook update, put a tweet on
Twitter, write a blog post, comment, etc. Requiring the
authorisation of rights holders before being allowed to place a
link to a resources that is available online would break the
internet as we know it and lead to a nightmarish permission
culture. Rights holders have sufficient rights that allow them
to control if they want their works to be available online or
not. Once a work is published online anyone must be free to
link to the work. It is like putting a footnote in a document.

NO OPINION

Should the viewing of a web-page where this implies the
temporary reproduction of a work or other subject matter
protected under copyright on the screen and in the cache memory
of the user’s computer, either in general or under specific
circumstances, be subject to the authorisation of the
rightholder?

 YES – Please explain whether you consider this to be the
case in general, or under specific circumstances, and why

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO – Please explain whether you consider this to be the case
in general, or under specific circumstances, and why (e.g.
because it is or should be covered by a copyright exception)

When you look at a website, parts of what you see on the screen
are copied on the hard disk of your computer. More generally,
your everyday uses of digital technology create multiple
temporary digital copies of content which are essential to
accessing and sharing content on the Internet. Requiring the
authorisation of the rightholder for viewing and reading
content that is already available amounts to an additional
permission which could lead to citizens infringing the law by
merely surfing on the Internet. This directly touches on your’
fundamental right to receive and impart information.
Critically, this is about citizens’ right to read.

 NO OPINION

Download to own digital content

Digital content is increasingly being bought via digital
transmission (e.g. download to own). Questions arise as to the
possibility for users todispose of the files they buy in this
manner (e.g. by selling them or by giving them as a gift). The
principle of EU exhaustion of the distribution right applies in
the case of the distribution of physical copies (e.g. when a
tangible article such as a CDor a book, etc. is sold, the right
holder cannot prevent the further distribution of that tangible
article)27

See also recital 28 of Directive 2001/29/EC.

. The issue that arises here is whether this principle can also
be applied in the case of an act of transmission equivalent in
its effect to distribution (i.e. where the buyer acquires the
property of the copy)28

In Case C-128/11 (Oracle vs. UsedSoft) the CJEU ruled that an
author cannot oppose the resale of a second-hand licence that
allows downloadinghis computer program from his website and
using it for an unlimited period of time. The exclusive right
of distribution of a copy of a computer program covered by such
a licence is exhausted on its first sale. While it is thus
admitted that the distribution right may be subject to
exhaustion in case of computer programs offered for download
with the right holder’s consent, the Court was careful to
emphasise that it reached this decision based on the Computer
Programs Directive. It was stressed that this exhaustion rule
constituted alex specialisin relation to the Information
Society Directive (UsedSoft, par. 51, 56).

. This raises difficult questions, notably relating to the
practical application of such an approach (how to avoid
re-sellers keeping and using a copy of a work after they have
“re-sold” it – this is often referred to as the “forward and
delete” question) as well as to the economic implications of
the creation of a second-hand market of copies of perfect
quality that never deteriorate (in contrast to the second-hand
market for physical goods).

[In particular if you are an end user/consumer:]Have you faced
restrictions when trying to resell digital files that you have
purchased (e.g. mp3 file, e-book)?

 YES – Please explain by giving examples

Sometimes, digital files are restricted in their use due to so
called ‘DRM’ or ‘Digital Rights Management’ tools that stop you
from using a file from one device to another or to copy it.
These types of restrictions do not apply to the offline
world,where you can simply take a physical book and give it to
a friend to read, so why would they be allowed in the online
world? DRM concerns on the one hand library databases and
access at universities. This is question 32(b) and 36(b) for
private persons andend-users. But it should also be more
extensively addressed in question 80. This essay covers
important differences between EU and US law:
http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2338976 It
should beclarified that DRM should not interfere withany of the
legal flexibilities, rights or opportunities granted to users of
culture. Also DRM should not override the exceptions and
limtations codified in law. We want legislators to decide what
legal and technical rights people have and do now have.
Technology companies should not do that. DRM can also be
mentioned in question 13 that asks if one has experienced
problems with trying to re-sell digital works.

 NO

 NO OPINION

[In particular if you are a right holder or a service provider:]
What would be the consequences of providing a legal framework
enabling the resale of previously purchased digital content?
Please specify per market (type of content) concerned.

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Registration of works and other subject matter – is it a good
idea?

Registration is not often discussed in copyright in the EU as
the existing international treaties in the area prohibit
formalities as a condition forthe protection and exercise of
rights. However, this prohibition is not absolute29

For example, it does not affect “domestic” works – i.e. works
originating in the country imposing the formalities as opposed
to works originating in another country.

.Moreover a system of registration does not need to be made
compulsory or constitute a precondition for the protection and
exercise of rights. With a longer term of protection and with
the increased opportunities that digital technology provides
for the useof content (including older works and works that
otherwise would not have been disseminated), the advantages and
disadvantages of a system of registration are increasingly being
considered30

On the basis of Article 3.6 of the Directive 2012/28/EU of
theEuropean Parliament and of the Council of 25 October 2012 on
certain permitted uses of orphan works, a publicly accessible
online database is currently being set up by the Office for
Harmonisation of the Internal Market (OHIM) for the
registration of orphan works.

.

Would the creation of a registration system at EU level help in
the identification and licensing of works and other subject
matter?

 YES

 NO

 NO OPINION

What would be the possible advantages of such a system?

[Open question]

Thecreation of a registration system at the EU level would be
beneficial to both authors and users as it makes it easier to
know if something is protected by copyright or not and to find
the rightholders of a specific work. In other words, it would
be cheaperand clearer to find out if a work is copyrighted and
who has the rights to it. A (mandatory) registration system
wouldalso provide a more efficient mechanism for commercial
licensing opportunities. and would prevent the appearance of
future orphan works.But of course, adopting such a system
cannot be to the detriment of keeping and enhancing the list of
copyright exceptions. Such a system would also give a more
accurate overview of creativity and culture in the EU. In many
countries around the world onepreviously needed to register the
copyrighted work one wished to commercially exploit with a
central copyright registry. This brought greater legal
certainty and clarity to a lot of actors. Copyright by default
creates a lot of problems because it is impossible to find out
who is the right owner of the right. In particular mandatory
registration to have a copyright should be required.

What would be the possible disadvantages of such a system?

[Open question]

Having a (mandatory) registration system willrequire an extra
effort from rightholders. This small extra effort would however
be minimal compared to the benefits of having the registration
information available. In the digital environment both
registering a work and searching for registered works can be
done with very little effort.

What incentives for registration by rightholders could be
envisaged?

[Open question]

There could be several incentives for rightholders to register
their works. Rules could be put in place whereby certain
elements of copyright protection are only available to
rightholders who have registered their works. For example,
registration might be required for a rightsholder to start an
enforcement action. Another incentive might be that
rightholders need to register their worksin order to be
eligible to collect royalties through collective rights
management organizations. Finally, registration could be made a
prerequisite for prolonging copyright protection after an
initial term (this would assume a much shorter duration than
the current term). For example, with an initial copyright term
of protection of 20 years (similar to patents), rightholders
who register their works in the system would have the ability
to extend the term for works they intend to exploit after the
first 20 years of protection.

How to improve the use and interoperability of identifiers

There are many private databases of works and other subject
matter held by producers, collective management organisations,
and institutions such as libraries, which are basedto a greater
or lesser extent on the use of (more or less) interoperable,
internationally agreed ‘identifiers’. Identifiers can be
compared to a reference number embedded in a work, are specific
to the sector in which they have been developed31

E.g. the International Standard Recording Code (ISRC) is used to
identify recordings, the International Standard Book Number
(ISBN) is used to identify books.

, and identify, variously, the work itself, the owner or the
contributor to a work or other subject matter.There are notable
examples of where industry is undertaking actions to improve the
interoperability of suchidentifiers and databases. The Global
Repertoire Database32

You will find more information about this initiative on the
following website:http://www.globalrepertoiredatabase.com/.

should, once operational, provide a single source of information
on the ownership and control of musical works worldwide. The
Linked Content Coalition33

You will find more information about this initiative (funded in
part by the European Commission) on the following website:
www.linkedcontentcoalition.org.

was established to develop building blocks for the expression
and management of rights and licensing across allcontent and
media types. It includes the development of a Rights Reference
Model (RRM) – a comprehensive data model for all types of
rights in all types of content. The UK Copyright Hub34

You will find more information about this initiative on the
following website:http://www.copyrighthub.co.uk/.

is seeking to take such identification systems a step further,
and to create a linked platform, enabling automated licensing
across different sectors.

What should be the role of the EU in promoting the adoption
of identifiers in the content sector, and in promoting the
development and interoperability of rights ownership and
permissions databases?

[Open question]

At the minimum the European Union should ensure twothings: (1)
that identifiers as well as rights ownership and permission
databases are based on open standards, that they are available
to all content creators and that they can be read by all market
participants free of charge. (2) the EU should also ensure that
all identifiers as as well as rights ownership and permission
databases are interoperable work across all of Europe (and
beyond). Any system that is developed must be developed in a
true multi stakeholder approach (e.g not only by rights holders
and intermediaries) and should be reflective of work already
undertaken (for example by Europeana). Rights ownership and
permission databases in particular must be publicly accessible
via machine readable interfaces. They must also include the
ability to store information on out-of-copyright (Public
Domain) works.

Term of protection – is it appropriate?

Works and other subject matter are protected under copyright for
a limited period of time. After the term of protection has
expired, a work falls into the public domain and can be freely
used by anyone (in accordance with the applicable national
rules on moral rights). The Berne Convention35

Berne Convention for the Protection of Literary and Artistic
Works,http://www.wipo.int/treaties/en/ip/berne/.

requires a minimum term of protection of 50 years after the
death of the author. The EU rules extend this term of
protection to 70 years after the death ofthe author (as do many
other countries, e.g. the US).

With regard to performers in the music sector and phonogram
producers, the term provided for in the EU rules also extend 20
years beyond what is mandated in international agreements,
providing for a term of protection of 70 years after the first
publication. Performers and producers in the audio-visual
sector, however, do not benefit from such an extended term of
protection.

Are the current terms of copyright protection still appropriate
in the digital environment?

 YES – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO – Please explain if they should be longer or shorter

In the EU, copyrighted material remains protected up to 70 years
after the death of the author. Moreover, sometimes this duration
is counted from another date and the death of the author and it
is not always clear who all the authors of a work are (for
example, for songs). That is confusing and excessively long if
you think that the purpose of copyright is to enable artists,
writers to create. This duration must be reduced to enhance
access to knowledge and culture much more quickly and to reduce
the problems (such as orphan works) that surface when
rightholders do not actively exploit their works. In this light
15 to 25 years after the first publication seems a more
proportionate duration. or even 50 years, which is the minimum
set in international rules. As a first step the term of
copyright protection should be reduced to the minimum
requirement established by the Berne Convention (life of the
creator plus 50 years). A reasonable protection term according
to Rufus Pollock (British economist at Cambridge University) is
about 15 years. Rick Falkvinge and Christian Engström have
proposed 25 years maximum protection. The PP-CZ proposes 5--10
years. See Falkvinge/Engström: http://www.copyrightreform.eu/
Rufus Pollock:
http://rufuspollock.org/papers/optimal_copyright_term.pdf

 NO OPINION

Limitations and exceptions in the Single Market

Limitations and exceptions to copyright and related rights
enable the use of works and other protected subject-matter,
without obtaining authorisation from the rightholders, for
certain purposes and to a certain extent (for instance the use
for illustration purposes of an extract from a novel by a
teacher in a literature class). At EU level they are
established in a number of copyright directives, most notably
Directive 2001/29/EC36

Plus Directive 96/9/ECon the legal protection of
databases;Directive 2009/24/ECon the legal protection of
computer programs,and Directive 92/100/ECon rental right and
lending right.

.

Exceptions and limitations in the national and EU copyright laws
have to respect international law37

Article 9(2) of the Berne Convention for the Protection of
Literary and Artistic Works (1971); Article 13 of the TRIPS
Agreement (Trade Related Intellectual Property Rights) 1994;
Article 16(2) of the WIPO Performers and Phonograms Treaty
(1996); Article 9(2) of the WIPO Copyright Treaty (1996).

. In accordance with international obligations, the EU acquis
requires that limitations and exceptions can only be applied in
certain special cases which do not conflict with a normal
exploitation of the work or other subject matter and do not
unreasonably prejudice the legitimate interest of the
rightholders.

Whereas the catalogue of limitations and exceptions included in
EU law is exhaustive (no other exceptions can be applied to the
rights harmonised at EU level)38

Other than the grandfathering of the exceptions of minor
importance for analogue uses existing in Member States at the
time of adoption of Directive 2001/29/EC (see, Art. 5(3)(o)).

, these limitations and exceptions are often optional39

With the exception of certain limitations: (i) in theComputer
Programs Directive, (ii) in the Database Directive, (iii)
Article 5(1) in the Directive 2001/29/EC and (iv) the Orphan
Works Directive.

, in the sense that Member States are free to reflect in
national legislation as many or as few of them as theywish.
Moreover, the formulation of certain of the limitations and
exceptions is general enough to give significant flexibility to
the Member States as to how, and to what extent, to implement
them (if they decide to do so). Finally, it is worth noting
thatnot all of the limitations and exceptions included in the
EU legal framework for copyright are of equivalent significance
in policy terms and in terms of their potential effect on the
functioning of the Single Market.

In addition, in the same manner thatthe definition of the rights
is territorial (i.e. has an effect only within the territory of
the Member State), the definition of the limitations and
exceptions to the rights is territorial too (so an act that is
covered by an exception in a Member State"A" may still require
the authorisation of the rightholder once we move to the Member
State "B")40

Only the exception established in the recent Orphan Works
Directive (a mandatory exception to copyright and related
rights in the case where the rightholders are not known or
cannot be located) has been given a cross-border effect, which
means that, for instance, once a literary work – for instance a
novel – is considered an orphan work in a Member State, that
same novel shall be considered an orphan work inall Member
States and can be used and accessed in all Member States.

.

The cross-border effect of limitations and exceptions also
raises the question of fair compensation of rightholders. In
some instances, Member States are obliged to compensate
rightholders for the harm inflicted on them by a limitation or
exception to their rights. In other instances Member States are
not obliged, but may decide, to provide for such compensation.
If a limitation or exception triggering a mechanism of fair
compensation were to be given cross-border effect (e.g. the
books are used for illustration in an online course given by an
university in a Member State "A" and the students are in a
Member State "B") then there would also be a need to clarify
which national law should determine the level of that
compensation and who should pay it.

Finally, the question of flexibility and adaptability is being
raised: what is the best mechanism to ensure that the EU and
Member States’ regulatory frameworks adapt when necessary
(either toclarify that certain uses are covered by an exception
or to confirm that for certain uses the authorisation of
rightholders is required)? The main question here is whether
a greater degree of flexibility can be introduced in the EU
and Member States regulatory framework while ensuring the
required legal certainty, including for the functioning of the
Single Market, and respecting the EU's international
obligations.

Are there problems arising from the fact that most limitations
and exceptions provided in the EU copyright directives are
optional for the Member States?

 YES – Please explain by referring to specific cases

Each EU country can pick and choose amongst the current list of
exceptions. This means in practice that even though something
you do inyour country might be perfectly legal, it could be
illegal when put online or shared with friends, family or
colleagues in another country. That is confusing and scary.
European citizens should have the same rights with regards to
access to knowledge and culture regardless of where they live.
The list of exceptions needs to be the same in every EU country
and must be more flexible to adapt to technological change. More
fundamentally, the approach whereby everything falls under
copyright except when an ‘exception’ gives a user more freedom
is flawed to start with and it should be the other way round:
human rights and freedoms should be the rule and copyright the
exception.

 NO – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO OPINION

Should some/all of the exceptions be made mandatory and, if so,
is there a need for a higher level of harmonisation of such
exceptions?

 YES – Please explain by referring to specific cases

At present, the EU only obliges EUcountries to adopt one
exception (regarding temporary acts of reproduction), while the
adoption of the others is optional. As a result, something
that’s legal in one country could be illegal elsewhere. An
example of how unworkable a non-compulsory implementation of
the limitations and exceptions is can be found here:
http://www.smarimccarthy.is/2011/08/copyright-combinatorics/
All exceptions should be made mandatory for all EU countries,
and specified as not exhaustive. It should also be stated that
these cases must be interpreted as applying to ‘similar uses’
and add a more general open norm based on ‘fair use’ or general
principles of fairness. Especially sharing of culture and making
private copies on the internet should be permissible.

 NO – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO OPINION

Should any new limitations and exceptions be added to or removed
from the existing catalogue?Please explain by referring to
specific cases.

[Open question]

Removing exceptions is unacceptable. On the contrary, a more
flexible approach is needed, combining the current system of a
list of exceptions (but made mandatory for all EU countries and
specified as not exhaustive), but stating specifically that
these cases must be interpreted as applying to ‘similar uses’
and add a more general open norm based on ‘fair use’ or general
principles of fairness. Other countries such as the US use this
‘fair use’ principle: Fair use means you can use copyright
material as long as the use is fair, for example reporting the
news, parody or satire. Europe would benefit from such a
flexible concept, that can adapt as technology changes.
Citizens must notably be allowed to share protected works and
adaptation for non-commercial purposes. For citizens to express
themselves online it is necessary that they can use copyright
protected material that others have created as part of their
own expressions (think remixes and so called user generated
content). In addition there need to be newexceptions that allow
text and data mining and remote access to digital content
(e-lending) by libraries. Especially sharing of culture and
making private copies on the internet should be permissible

Independently from the questions above, is there aneed to
provide for a greater degree of flexibility in the EU
regulatory framework for limitations and exceptions?

 YES – Please explain why

The current EU copyright regime offers some form of flexibility,
but in practice everything tends to fall under copyright unless
it is covered by a specific exception in the law. The trouble
is that these exceptions are narrow, specific and
technologically outdated: the list was written in 2001! This
was well before YouTube and Facebook were created. As a result,
everyday habits of online users could be considered illegal
today. A blogger linking to copyrighted content, a meme based
on a copyrighted image, a video with some footage from an
existing movie or a song: all of that could create issues for
the user that posted them. Other countries such as the US use a
principle called ‘fair use’: Fair use means you can use
copyright material as long as the use is fair, for example
reporting the news, parody and satire or education. Europe
would benefit from such a flexibleconcept, that can adapt as
technology changes. It would also ensure that copyright
focusses on what it should, instead of, for example, making it
illegal for teachers to share PowerPoint presentations with
copyrighted material on websites or by e-mail. Especially
sharing of culture and making private copies on the internet
should be permissible.

 NO – Please explain why

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO OPINION

If yes, what would be the best approach toprovide for
flexibility? (e.g. interpretation by national courts and the
ECJ, periodic revisions of the directives, interpretations by
the Commission, built-in flexibility, e.g. in the form of a
fair-use or fair dealing provision / open norm, etc.)?
Pleaseexplain indicating what would be the relative advantages
and disadvantages of such an approach as well as its possible
effects on the functioning of the Internal Market.

[Open question]

The existing EU system does not create legal certainty because
everyEU country can choose its list of exceptions and
international rules have added complexity and the system of a
static list of exceptions is not adapted to our fast evolving
society. This is why a more flexible approach is needed,
combining the current system of a list of exceptions (but made
mandatory for all EU countries and specified as not
exhaustive), but stating specifically that these cases must be
interpreted as applying to ‘similar uses’ and add a more
general norm that would allow flexibility andcan adapt to
future changes. In the US for example, they have the principle
of 'fair use' that allow more flexibility and adaptability.
Disadvantages of open norms: ● Because they leave room for
interpretation (what is ‘fair’?), open norms rely on court
decisions to get defined and can thus reduce legal security the
first years of their introduction. This why keeping a list of
(mandatory) exceptions is sensible. Advantages of open norms: ●
The US example has shown that an open norm becomes more
predictableas to its interpretation as more courts issue their
views on it. ● Flexible norms avoid having to adapt the list of
limitations and exceptions every X years, and will encourage
‘tomorrow’s inventions’, creative re-use and the development
of new business models. Especially sharing of culture and
making private copies on the internet should be permissible

Does the territoriality of limitations and exceptions, in your
experience, constitute a problem?

 YES – Please explain why and specify which exceptions you
are referring to

At present, even though the EU has identified a list of
exceptions in the Copyright Directive, each EU country can
choose which of these exceptions are put into national law. As
a result, something that’s legal in one country could be
illegal elsewhere. For example, the UK does not have a private
copying exception, so an act that is legal in Spain or the
Netherland suddenly becomes an offence in the UK, that can be
criminal in some cases. Finland hardly has a parody exception,
so a workconsidered legal in Germany could be infringing
copyright in Finland. From a research perspective, this means
that researchers have difficulties working together and sharing
knowledge across borders. Currently, for example, inter-library
loans are hamperedacross borders. Give your own examples of
such problems, and tell the European Commission that this needs
to stop and that ALL exceptions should be made mandatory across
the EU.

 NO – Please explain why and specify which exceptions you are
referring to

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO OPINION

In the event that limitations and exceptions established at
national level were to have cross-border effect, how should the
question of “fair compensation” beaddressed, when such
compensation is part of the exception? (e.g. who pays whom,
where?)

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Access to content in libraries and archives

Directive 2001/29/EC enablesMember States to reflect in their
national law a range of limitations and exceptions for the
benefit of publicly accessible libraries, educational
establishments and museums, as well as archives. If
implemented, these exceptions allow acts of preservationand
archiving41

Article 5(2)c of Directive 2001/29.

and enable on-site consultation of the works and other subject
matter in the collections of such institutions42

Article 5(3)n of Directive 2001/29.

. The public lending (under an exception or limitation)by these
establishments of physical copies of works and other subject
matter is governed by the Rental and Lending Directive43

Article 5 of Directive 2006/115/EC.

.

Questions arise as to whether the current framework continues to
achieve the objectives envisaged or whether it needs to be
clarified or updated to cover use in digital networks. At the
same time, questions arise as to the effect of such a possible
expansion on the normal exploitation of works and other subject
matter and as to the prejudice this may cause to rightholders.
The role of licensing and possible framework agreements between
different stakeholders also needs to be considered here.

Preservation and archiving

The preservation of the copies of works or other subject-matter
held in thecollections of cultural establishments (e.g. books,
records, or films) – the restoration or replacement of works,
the copying of fragile works - may involve the creation of
another copy/ies of these works or other subject matter. Most
Member States providefor an exception in their national laws
allowing for the making of such preservation copies. The scope
of the exception differs from Member State to Member State (as
regards the type of beneficiary establishments, the types of
works/subject-matter coveredby the exception, the mode of
copying and the number of reproductions that a beneficiary
establishment may make). Also, the current legal status of new
types of preservation activities (e.g. harvesting and archiving
publicly available web content) is often uncertain.

(a)[In particular if you are an institutional user:]Have you
experienced specific problems when trying to use an exception
to preserve and archive specific works or other subject matter
in your collection?

(b)[In particular if you are a right holder:]Have you
experienced problems with the use by libraries, educational
establishments, museum or archives of the preservation
exception?

 YES – Please explain, by Member State, sector, and the type
of use in question.

The main problem with theexisting exception is that it does not
cover all situations in which cultural heritage institutions
(libraries and archives but also museums) need to make
reproductions as part of their public mission to preserve and
make available the works in their collections. On top of that,
the existing exception is not implemented in the same way
across the EU. As a result, most EU countries do not allow the
making of copies for crucial activities like format shifting
and structural digitization of collections or putting all kinds
of artificial constraints to digitalisation. This, and the fact
that they cannot make digitized works available on-line without
a license (see question 32 as well), severely limits
institutions in how they can leverage digital technologies.

 NO

 NO OPINION

If there are problems, how would they best be solved?

[Open question]

By clarifying the scope of the existing EU legislation and
explicitly broadening the existing exception in article 5(2)c
of the Copyright Directive, so that itallows institutions to
make reproductions of all works in their collection as long as
these are not intended for direct commercial advantage. A very
similar recommendation can be found in the 'Study on the
application of directive 2001/29/EC on copyright and related
rights in the information society' that was commissioned by the
European Commission in 2013. This broadened exception would of
course need to be applied in the same way in every EU country.

If your view is that a legislative solution isneeded, what would
be its main elements? Which activities of the beneficiary
institutions should be covered and under which conditions?

[Open question]

The main element would be a broadening of the existing exception
in article 5(2)c of the Copyright directive. Instead of only
allowing specific acts of reproductions it should allow all
acts of reproduction necessary for publicly accessible
libraries, educational establishments or museums, or by
archives to achieve aims related to their public-interest
missions. This should include reproductions made as part of
mass digitization efforts and reproductions for format
shifting. Reproductions should be limited to internal use which
is not for direct commercial or economic advantage or use in
line with other exceptions and limitations allowed for by the
directive. This is in line with the recommendations found in
the 'Study on the application of directive 2001/29/EC on
copyright and related rights in the information society' that
was commissioned by the European Commission in 2013.

If your view is that a different solution is needed, what would
it be?

[Open question]

Only a legislative clarification approach can work (see answer
to question 30)

Off-premises access to library collections

Directive 2001/29/ECprovides an exception for the consultation
of works and other subject-matter (consulting an e-book,
watching a documentary) via dedicated terminals on the premises
of such establishments for the purpose of research and private
study. The online consultation of works and other
subject-matter remotely (i.e. when the library user is not on
the premises of the library) requires authorisation and is
generally addressed in agreements between
universities/libraries and publishers. Some argue that the law
rather than agreements should provide for the possibility to,
and the conditions for, granting online access to collections.

(a)[In particular if you are an institutional user:]Have you
experienced specific problems when trying to negotiate
agreements with rights holders that enable you to provide
remote access, including across borders, to your collections
(or parts thereof) for purposes of research and private study?

(b)[In particular if you are an end user/consumer:]Have you
experienced specific problemswhen trying to consult, including
across borders, works and other subject-matter held in the
collections of institutions such as universities and national
libraries when you are not on the premises of the institutions
in question?

(c)[In particular if youare aright holder:]Have you negotiated
agreements with institutional users that enable those
institutions to provide remote access, including across
borders, to the works or other subject-matter in their
collections, for purposes of research and private study?

[Open question]

(a) From our perspective this question fails to address the most
urgent issue confronting cultural heritage institutions
(including museums) today: providing online access to works in
their collection. (b) Explanation: This shouldbe prefaced by a
concrete example if possible] From the perspective of citizens,
researchers and other end users it does not make sense that
publicly funded cultural heritage institutions are not allowed
to make available works in their collection that arenot in
commercial circulation anymore. (a) From both the perspective
of publicly available libraries, archives and museums as well
as the perspective of their patrons (end users/consumers) the
existing exception that allows institutions to make works in
their collections available ‘for the purpose of research or
private study, to individual members of the public by dedicated
terminals on the premises’ (article 5(3)n) is extremely limited
and not in line with the technological possibilities and the
expectations of citizens anymore. Limiting the availability of
digitised works to dedicated terminals on the premises of
cultural heritage institutions prevents them from reaching
citizens that cannot travel to the premises (for example
because they are disabled or because they lack the economic
means to do so). Furthermore it is out of line with the
legitimate expectation of users that have been shaped by
universal online accessibility of other services. Europe's
citizens and researchers would greatly benefit fromonline
access to the collections of Europe's publicly funded
institutions. (b) These institutions have built and maintained
their collections with public funds. Their mission is to
provide access to the knowledge and culture contained in these
collections. As long as there are sufficient safeguards that
prevent these institutions from interfering with the normal
exploitations of works in their collection they should be
allowed to make their collections available online for
non-commercial uses by the general public. For citizens it is
perfectly understandable that they cannot expect cultural
heritage institutions to provide unlimited free access to works
that still are in commercial circulation, but it does not make
sense at all that institutions have to restrict access to works
that are not in circulation anymore because they are still under
copyright protection. It should be noted here that this is also
true for authors who may have a legitimate interest that works
that they have created are kept availablevia cultural heritage
institutions and who often rely on access to works of others as
part of their own creative process. It should be clarified that
DRM should not interfere with any of the legal flexibilities,
rights or opportunities granted to users ofculture. Also DRM
should not override the exceptions and limtations codified in
law. We want legislators to decide what legal and technical
rights people have and do now have. Technology companies should
not do that.

If there are problems, how would theybest be solved?

[Open question]

The best solution for the problem is broadening the scope of the
exception currently provided for in article 5(3)n of the
Copyright Directive in order to ensure that anyone can make
their collections available on-line for scientific and
educational purposes without restriction to on-site terminals.
This broadened exception should be implemented in the same
manner in all EU countries.

If your view is that a legislative solution is needed, what
would be its main elements? Which activities of the beneficiary
institutions should be covered and under which conditions?

[Open question]

The main element would be a broadening of the existing exception
in article 5(3)n of the copyright directive. Instead of limiting
the makingavailable to dedicated terminals on the premises of
the institutions it should apply to making the works available
online via public networks such as the internet. The scope of
the exception should further be expanded to not only include
‘the purpose of research or private study’ by ‘individual
members of the public’ but should apply to all non-commercial
uses. It also seems reasonable to limit the scope of the
exception to works that are not in commercial circulation
anymore and to allow rights holders toopt out of the exception.
This would ensure that the legitimate interests of rights
holders would not be harmed while allowing cultural heritage
institutions to bring large parts of their collections online.
In fact many authors would benefit from improving online access
to works that are out of commercial circulation because works
that they have created are kept available via cultural heritage
institutions.

If your view is that a different solution is needed, what would
it be?

[Open question]

Only a legislative clarification could solve the current
problems. See answer to question 34.

E – lending

Traditionally, public libraries have loaned physical copies of
works (i.e. books, sometimes also CDs and DVDs) to their users.
Recent technological developmentshave made it technically
possible for libraries to provide users with temporary access
to digital content, such as e-books, music or films via
networks. Under the current legal framework, libraries need to
obtain the authorisation of the rights holders toorganise such
e-lending activities. In various Member States, publishers and
libraries are currently experimenting with different business
models for the making available of works online, including
direct supply of e-books to libraries by publishers or bundling
by aggregators.

(a)[In particular if you are alibrary:]Have you experienced
specific problems when trying to negotiate agreements to enable
the electronic lending (e-lending), including across borders, of
books or other materials held in your collection?

(b)[In particular if you are an end user/consumer:]Have you
experienced specific problems when trying to borrow books or
other materials electronically (e-lending), including across
borders, from institutions such as public libraries?

(c)[Inparticular if you are aright holder:]Have you negotiated
agreements with libraries to enable them to lend books or other
materials electronically, including across borders?

 YES – Please explain with specific examples

(a) Libraries face various problemswhen trying to negotiate
electronic lending agreements that range from an outfront
denial of sales by publishers to the removal of content by
publishers without informing the library. The system currently
in place often requires multiple licences with different
models. (b) Explanation: There is currently a lack of clarity
on the conditions of access to content for users. In practice,
this means that registered users’ rights are being
deteriorated: in the physical offline world, crossing a border
with a borrowed book is not a problem yet it is impossible to
have online access to a library across a border. (c) Please
share your experience if you negotiated agreements with
libraries to enable them to lend books or other materials
electronically, including across borders. (b) Please share any
concrete examples of issues faced when trying to borrow books
or other materials electronically (e-lending), including across
borders, from institutions such as public libraries. It should
be clarified that DRM should not interfere with any of the
legal flexibilities, rights or opportunities granted to users
of culture. Also DRM should not override the exceptions and
limtations codified in law. We want legislators to decide what
legal and technical rights people have and donow have.
Technology companies should not do that.

 NO

 NO OPINION

If there are problems, how would they best be solved?

[Open question]

'The best solution for the problem would be to create legal
certainty by unambiguously including the right toe-lending in
EU law, by including a new specific exception for time limited
remote access to digital content (e-lending)’ The following
principles should be put in place across the EU: - All e-book
titles available for sale to the public should be available to
libraries for acquisition and access; - All e-books titles
should be available to libraries at the time of publication;
-Publishers should deliver e-books in interoperable formats;
-Libraries should be permitted to make available acquired or
licensede-books for a limited period of time to a user. -It
should be possible to use the same e-book title simultaneously;
-Registered users should be able to download an e-book either in
the library or by way of remote access via authentication
systems.

The following two questions are relevant both to this point (n°
3) and the previous one (n° 2).

[In particular if you are an institutional user:]What
differences do you see in the management of physical and online
collections, including providing access toyour subscribers? What
problems have you encountered?

[Open question]

From the perspective of cultural heritage institutions there are
enormous differences between physical and online collections.
These differences are so fundamental that it does not
makessense to compare the two. The ability to offer access to
their collections online frees cultural heritage institutions
from many of the constraints imposed by them by the properties
of analogue media and their physical infrastructure (such as
buildings).This has the potential to radically improve the
ability of publicly funded cultural heritage institutions to
carry out their public mission to provide access to knowledge
and culture. Unfortunately this enormous potential is currently
being held back by copyright rules unnecessarily restrict how
cultural heritage institutions can exercise their mission in
the online environment. Under the current Eu copyright rules
cultural heritage institutions are depended on permission from
rightholders in order to makeprotected works in their
collection available online. This makes no sense in situations
where the majority of works held by these institutions are not
even commercially available.

[In particular if you are a right holder:]What difference do you
see between libraries’ traditional activities such as
on-premises consultation or public lending and activities such
as off-premises (online, at a distance) consultation and
e-lending? What problems have you encountered?

[Open question]

From a users’ perspective, there is no difference in these
activities, aside from the convenience of online tools. As a
rightholder, please share your views and experience.

Mass digitisation

The term “mass digitisation” is normally used to refer to
efforts by institutions suchas libraries and archives to
digitise (e.g. scan) the entire content or part of their
collections with an objective to preserve these collections
and, normally, to make them available to the public. Examples
are efforts by libraries to digitise novels form the early part
of the 20thcentury or whole collections of pictures of
historical value. This matter has been partly addressed at the
EU level by the 2011 Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) on key
principles on the digitisation and making available of
outof commerce works (i.e. works which are no longer found in
the normal channels of commerce), which is aiming to facilitate
mass digitisation efforts (for books and learned journals) on
the basis of licence agreements between libraries and similar
culturalinstitutions on the one hand and the collecting
societies representing authors and publishers on the other44

You will find more information about his MoU on the following
website:http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/copyright/out-of-commerce/index_en.htm.

. Provided the required funding is ensured (digitisation
projects are extremely expensive), the result of this MoU
should be that books that are currently to befound only in the
archives of, for instance, libraries will be digitised and made
available online to everyone. The MoU is based on voluntary
licences (granted by Collective Management Organisations on the
basis of the mandates they receive from authors and publishers).
Some Member States may need to enact legislation to ensure the
largest possible effect of such licences (e.g. by establishing
in legislation a presumption of representation of a collecting
society or the recognition of an “extended effect” to the
licences granted)45

France and Germany have already adopted legislation to back the
effects of the MoU.The French act (LOI n° 2012-287 du 1er mars
2012 relative à l'exploitation numérique des livres
indisponibles du xxe siècle) foresees collectivemanagement,
unless the author or publisher in question opposes such
management.The German act (Gesetz zur Nutzung verwaister und
vergriffener Werke und einer weiteren Änderung des
Urheberrechtsgesetzes vom 1.Oktober 2013) contains a legal
presumption ofrepresentation by a collecting society in
relation to works whose rightholders are not members of the
collecting society.

.

[In particular if you are an institutional user,engaging or
wanting to engage in mass digitisation projects, a right
holder, a collective management organisation:]Would it be
necessary in your country to enact legislation to ensure that
the results of the 2011 MoU (i.e. the agreements concluded
between libraries and collecting societies) have a cross-border
effect so that out of commerce works can be accessed across the
EU?

 YES – Please explain why and how it could best be achieved

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO – Please explain

This question misses the point. The 2011 Memorandum of
Understanding is much too limited to make an impact on mass
digitization. This is illustrated by the fact that the
Memorandum of Understanding is not being used by the intended
beneficiaries (The 2013 'Study on the application of directive
2001/29/EC oncopyright and related rights in the information
society' commissioned by the European Commission lists a mere 2
mass digitization projects 'inspired' by the MoU). If Europe
wants to enable its cultural heritage institutions to transfer
their collections into the digital age (and there cannot be any
doubt that this is both an important policy objective and a
reasonable expectation of taxpayers fund these organisations) a
far more comprehensive approach is needed. This can be achieved
by extending the scope of the exception in article 5(3)n of the
Copyright Directive as outlined in the answer to question 34
above. Doing this would provide Europe's cultural heritage
institutions a clear legal framework for operating in the
digital environment that would allow them to make their
collections available online (which is where citizens
rightfully expect them to be).

 NO OPINION

Would it be necessary to develop mechanisms, beyond those
already agreed for other types of content (e.g. for audio- or
audio-visualcollections, broadcasters’ archives)?

 YES – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO OPINION

Teaching

Directive 2001/29/EC46

Article 5(3)a of Directive 2001/29.

enables Member States to implement in their national legislation
limitations and exceptions for the purpose of illustration for
non-commercial teaching. Such exceptions would typically allow
a teacher to use parts of or full works to illustrate his
course, e.g. by distributing copies of fragments of a book or
of newspaper articles in the classroom or by showing protected
content on a smart board without having to obtain authorisation
from the right holders. The open formulation of this (optional)
provision allows for rather different implementation at Member
States level. The implementation of the exception differs from
Member State to Member State, with several Member States
providing instead a framework for the licensing of content for
certain educational uses. Some argue that the law should
provide for better possibilities for distance learning and
study at home.

(a)[In particular if you are an end user/consumer or an
institutional user:]Haveyou experienced specific problems when
trying to use works or other subject-matter for illustration
for teaching, including across borders?

(b)[In particular if you are a right holder:]Have you
experienced specific problems resulting from the way in which
works or other subject-matter are used for illustration for
teaching, including across borders?

 YES – Please explain

The current exception for teaching in the EU law is written in a
rather broad and open way but none of the EU countries have
implemented it as broadly as allowed by the Copyright
Directive. If implemented broadly into the national laws the
exception allows for use of any copyrighted material, including
text, film, multimedia for illustration of teaching in
classrooms and also in onlinecourses. It should also allow for
using copyrighted works in teaching compilations, analog or
digital. Such uses should not require a license. Compensation
is not required but allowed. Because of the narrow
implementations of the broad exception provided in the
Directive, permitted use of works in education differs between
member states. This presents special difficulties for the
providers of online open courses that can be access by citizens
of various EU countries If you personally encountered a problem
with accessing or making available any online courses in the
EU, please share it. Please also indicate if in your country
online uses of works for teaching are not allowed in and share
how you feel about such an old-fashioned restrictions.

 NO

 NO OPINION

If there are problems, how would they best be solved?

[Open question]

In my opinion this would be fine: "The problem would best be
solved by making a broad educational exception mandatory for
all EU countries. This mandatory educational exceptionshould
cover all uses of all types of works for illustration of
teaching, regardless of the institution. It is important to
stress that uses of computer programs , databases and
multimedia works (such as video games) should be expressly
included."

What mechanisms exist in the market place to facilitate the use
of content for illustration for teaching purposes? How
successful are they?

[Open question]

I'm in Finland and in my opinion the limit what can be used as
teaching material is just annoying. None wants to get into
trouble so they avoid using any material that might be
problematic. This also leads to situation where schools don't
use this licensing scheme because it adds expences. Therefore
budgets for schools go lower (because schools don't use these
licenses because of their expenses, schools wont get budgeted
for them becuase there is "no need") In some EU countries,
certain educational uses require a license. For example
universities in Spain pay to collecting societies a flat fee of
5 euro per student to allow reproduction and online uses of
works for teaching purposes. In France the works are licensed
under special agreements with collecting societies. Each time a
teacher wishes to use a work for the purpose of illustration of
teaching, it is checked if the work and the teacher’s
educational institution are covered by the agreement. Such use
must be then registered and reported. In Denmark and Finland
the works are licensed under collective licensing schemes. If
this is the case in your member state please describe any
specific problems with such mechanisms that are known to you.

If your view is that a legislative solution is needed, what
would be its main elements? Which activities of the beneficiary
institutions should be covered and underwhat conditions?

[Open question]

I would like the material being used to have reference to the
source or person who has made the content being used
originally. Attribution to the one who made the content should
be honored. It should be made explicitly possible for anyone to
make works available on-line for educational purposes without
restriction to on-site terminals, both in original form, as
well as in the form of an adaptation.

If your view is that a different solution is needed, what would
it be?

[Open question]

Only a legislative approach could solve the current
uncertainties. See our answer to questions 43 and 45: the
problem would best be solved by making a broad educational
exception mandatory for all EU countries. This mandatory
educational exception should cover all uses of all types of
works for illustration of teaching, regardless of the
institution. It is important to stress that uses of computer
programs , databases and multimedia works (such as video games)
should be expressly included.

Research

Directive 2001/29/EC47

Article 5(3)a of Directive 2001/29.

enables Member States to choose whether to implement in their
national laws a limitation for the purpose of non-commercial
scientific research. The open formulation of this (optional)
provision allows for rather different implementations at Member
States level.

(a)[In particular if you are an end user/consumer or an
institutional user:]Have you experienced specific problems when
trying to use works or other subject matter in the context of
research projects/activities, including across borders?

(b)[In particular if you are a right holder:]Have you
experienced specific problems resulting from the way in which
works or other subject-matter are used in the context of
researchprojects/activities, including across borders?

 YES – Please explain

Access to research papers is often difficult due to some parties
want to get payment for accessing their "published" research
material. This often leads to problem where multiple research
groups are researching the same thing even if some other group
has already managed to resolve the problem but due to
restricted access to the material they cannot advance to
further level of research. This practically means wasted
manpower. I can mostlyget around this by using my Universitys
own library softwares who have licenses to access these
materials but the cost a fortune and now that funding reform of
Universities in Finland has been done Universities are cutting
expenses where ever they can andthis is affecting access to
information available. Currently research activities are
covered by the same exception as educational uses. It is
therefore a broad provision. The type of research institution
is not relevant: it may be publicly funded or private as long
as the research itself is non-commercial. Contrary to the
educational exception, the exception for research is not
restrictively adopted in national laws. However, the main
problems with accessing and using scientific materials are
mainly practical. The exception allows for their use for
research purposes, but they are usually protected by
restrictive licenses or DRM (Digital Rights Management) systems
- or simply only published in hard copies and not accessible.
For example, licenses require that works are made available
using certain networks or software only. Text and data mining
is often explicitly prohibited in licenses, or allowed only to
a limited extent. If you experienced any problems accessing
materials for research purposes or any otherproblems concerning
your research activities please describe them.

 NO

 NO OPINION

If there are problems, how would they best be solved?

[Open question]

Main problems concern the lack of access to scientific material
due to prohibitive licensingand/or DRMs. They could best be
solved by promoting and implementing open access principles.
Perhaps in some cases collective licensing schemes could be
used in order to encourage scientific publishers to make their
publications available for research activities. Such schemes
(where a fee would be due) should cover commercial as well as
non-commercial research. Please add any other suggestions you
may have on how to facilitate access to scientific materials.

What mechanisms exist in the Member States tofacilitate the use
of content for research purposes? How successful are they?

[Open question]

Collective licensing scheme is being used in Finland and in my
opinion they are bit problematic. It has been so far the best
they have been able to do but it ain't very good.

Disabilities

Directive 2001/29/EC48

Article 5 (3)b of Directive 2001/29.

provides for an exception/limitation for the benefit of people
with a disability. The open formulation of this (optional)
provision allows for rather differentimplementations at Member
States level. At EU and international level projects have been
launched to increase the accessibility of works and other
subject-matter for persons with disabilities (notably by
increasing the number of works published in specialformats and
facilitating their distribution across the European Union)49

The European Trusted Intermediaries Network (ETIN) resulting
from a Memorandum of Understanding between representatives of
the right-holder community (publishers, authors, collecting
societies) and interested parties such as associations for
blind and dyslexic persons
(http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/copyright/initiatives/access/index_en.htm)
and the Trusted Intermediary Global Accessible Resources (TIGAR)
project in WIPO (http://www.visionip.org/portal/en/).

.

TheMarrakesh Treaty50

Marrakesh Treaty to Facilitate Access to Published Works by
Visually Impaired Persons and Persons with Print Disabilities,
Marrakesh, June 17 to 28 2013.

has been adopted to facilitate access to published works for
persons who are blind, visually impaired, or otherwise print
disabled. The Treaty creates a mandatory exception to copyright
that allows organisations for the blind to produce, distribute
and make available accessible format copies to visually
impaired persons without the authorisation of the rightholders.
The EU and its Member States have started work to sign and
ratify the Treaty. This may require the adoption of certain
provisions at EU level (e.g. to ensure the possibility to
exchange accessible format copies across borders).

(a)[In particular if you are a person with a disability or an
organisation representing persons with disabilities:]Have you
experienced problems with accessibility to content, including
across borders, arising from Member States’ implementation of
this exception?

(b)[In particular if you are an organisation providing services
for persons with disabilities:]Have you experienced problems
when distributing/communicating works published in special
formats across the EU?

(c)[In particular if you are aright holder:]Have you experienced
specific problems resulting from the application of limitations
or exceptions allowing for the distribution/communication of
works published in special formats, including across borders?

 YES – Please explain by givingexamples

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO

 NO OPINION

If there are problems, what could be done to improve
accessibility?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

What mechanisms exist in the market place to facilitate
accessibility to content? How successful are they?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Text and data mining

Text and datamining/content mining/data analytics51

For the purpose of the present document, the term “text and data
mining” will be used.

are different terms used to describe increasingly important
techniques used in particular by researchers for the
exploration ofvast amounts of existing texts and data (e.g.,
journals, web sites, databases etc.). Through the use of
software or other automated processes, an analysis is made of
relevant texts and data in order to obtain new insights,
patterns and trends.

The textsand data used for mining are either freely accessible
on the internet or accessible through subscriptions to e.g.
journals and periodicals that give access to the databases of
publishers. A copy is made of the relevant texts and data (e.g.
on browser cachememories or in computers RAM memories or onto
the hard disk of a computer), prior to the actual analysis.
Normally, it is considered that to mine protected works or
other subject matter, it is necessary to obtain authorisation
from the right holders for the making of such copies unless
such authorisation can be implied (e.g. content accessible to
general public without restrictions on the internet, open
access).

Some argue that the copies required for text and data mining are
covered by the exception fortemporary copies in Article 5.1 of
Directive 2001/29/EC. Others consider that text and data mining
activities should not even be seen as covered by copyright. None
of this is clear, in particular since text and data mining does
not consist only of a singlemethod, but can be undertaken in
several different ways. Important questions also remain as to
whether the main problems arising in relation to this issue go
beyond copyright (i.e. beyond the necessity or not to obtain
the authorisation to use content) and relate rather to the need
to obtain “access” to content (i.e. being able to use e.g.
commercial databases).

A specific Working Group was set up on this issue in the
framework of the "Licences for Europe" stakeholder dialogue. No
consensus was reached among participating stakeholders on either
the problems to be addressed or the results. At the same time,
practical solutions to facilitate text and data mining of
subscription-based scientific content were presented by
publishers as an outcome of “Licencesfor Europe”52

See the document “Licences for Europe – ten pledges to bring
more content
online”:http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/copyright/docs/licences-for-europe/131113_ten-pledges_en.pdf.

. In the context of these discussions, other stakeholders argued
that no additional licences should be required to mine material
to which access has been provided through a subscription
agreement and considered that a specific exception for text and
data mining should be introduced, possibly on the basis of
a distinction between commercial and non-commercial.

(a)[In particular if you are an end user/consumer or an
institutional user:]Have youexperienced obstacles, linked to
copyright, when trying to use text or data mining methods,
including across borders?

(b)[In particular if you are a service provider:]Have you
experienced obstacles, linked to copyright, when providing
services based on text or data mining methods, including across
borders?

(c)[In particular if you are a right holder:]Have you
experienced specific problems resulting from the use of text
and data mining in relation to copyright protected content,
including across borders?

 YES – Please explain

I have encountered this problem many times when seeking
information for my research papers. Many times digital
magazines are protected in such way that you need a specific
form of reader to access the data. And when trying to extract
the information from them I'm forced to break the agreement of
not to reverse engineer the "special reading software" in
question. This limits the usability of information. My answer
wasn't really general here but this a specific problem I have
encountered. (a) Text and data mining covers the extraction of
facts and data , which are not covered by copyright. From a
legal point of view, the problem is that text and data mining
may infringe copyright because it is necessary to make copies
of content to convert it into machine readable format. (a) From
a practical/technical point of view, technical protection
measures (TPMs) can prevent users from downloading content in
order to ‘mine’ it. This notably seriously impedes research.

 NO – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO OPINION

If there are problems, how would they best be solved?

[Open question]

An exception for text and data mining would provide legal
certainty. It should also be explicitlystated in the law that
technical protection measures (TPMs) and contracts should not
override such an exception. Such an exception should also not
differentiate between commercial and non-commercial activities,
as such a differentiation is not in the public interest

If your view is that a legislative solution is needed, what
would be its main elements? Which activities should be covered
and under what conditions?

[Open question]

We need a specific exception for text and data mining, that also
explicitlystates that technical protection measures (TPMs) and
contracts should not override such an exception. Such an
exception should also not differentiate between commercial and
non-commercial activities, as such a differentiation is not in
the public interest.

If your view is that a different solution is needed, what would
it be?

[Open question]

Only a legislative approach can solve the issues faced. See
answer to questions 54 and 55.

Are there other issues, unrelated to copyright, that constitute
barriersto the use of text or data mining methods?

From a practical/technical point of view, technical protection
measures (TPMs) can prevent users from downloading content in
order to ‘mine’ it. This notably seriously impedes research.

User-generated content

Technological and service developments mean that citizens can
copy, use and distribute content at little to no financial
cost. As a consequence, new types of online activities are
developing rapidly, including the making of so-called
“user-generated content”. While users can create totally
original content, they can also take one or several
pre-existing works, change something in the work(s), and upload
the result on the Internet e.g. to platforms and blogs53

A typical example could be the “kitchen” or “wedding” video
(adding one's own video to a pre-existing sound recording), or
adding one's own text to a pre-existing photograph. Other
examples are “mash-ups” (blending two sound recordings), and
reproducing parts of journalistic work (report, review etc.)in
a blog.

. User-generated content (UGC) can thus cover the modification
of pre-existing works even if the newly-generated/"uploaded"
work does not necessarily require a creative effort and results
from merely adding, subtracting or associating some pre-existing
content with other pre-existing content. This kind of activity
is not “new” as such. However, the development of social
networking and social media sites that enable users to share
content widely has vastly changed the scale of such activities
and increased the potential economic impact for those holding
rights in the pre-existing works. Re-use is no longer the
preserve of a technically and artistically adept elite. With
the possibilities offered by the new technologies, re-use is
open to all, at nocost. This in turn raises questions with
regard to fundamental rights such the freedom of expression and
the right to property.

A specific Working Group was set up on this issue in the
framework of the "Licences for Europe" stakeholder dialogue. No
consensus was reached among participating stakeholders on either
the problems to be addressed or the results or even the
definition of UGC. Nevertheless, a wide range of views were
presented as to the best way to respond to this phenomenon. One
view was to say that a new exception is needed to cover UGC, in
particular non-commercial activities by individuals such as
combining existing musical works with videos, sequences of
photos, etc. Another view was that no legislative change is
needed: UGC is flourishing, andlicensing schemes are
increasingly available (licence schemes concluded between
rightholders and platforms as well as micro-licences concluded
between rightholders and the users generating the content. In
any event, practical solutions to ease user-generated content
and facilitate micro-licensing for small users were pledged by
rightholders across different sectors as a result of the
“Licences for Europe” discussions54

See the document “Licences for Europe – ten pledges to bring
more content
online”:http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/copyright/docs/licences-for-europe/131113_ten-pledges_en.pdf.

.

(a)[In particular if you are an end user/consumer:]Have you
experienced problems when trying to use pre-existing works or
other subject matter to disseminate new content on the
Internet, including across borders?

(b)[In particular if you are a service provider:]Have you
experienced problems whenusers publish/disseminate new content
based on the pre-existing works or other subject-matter through
your service, including across borders?

(c)[In particular if you are a right holder:]Have you
experienced problems resulting from the way the users areusing
pre-existing works or other subject-matter to disseminate new
content on the Internet, including across borders?

 YES – Please explain by giving examples

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO

 NO OPINION

(a)[In particular if you are an end user/consumer or a right
holder:]Have you experienced problems when trying to ensure
that the work you have created (on the basis of pre-existing
works) is properly identified for online use? Are proprietary
systemssufficient in this context?

(b)[In particular if you are a service provider:]Do you provide
possibilities for users that are publishing/disseminating the
works they have created (on the basis of pre-existing works)
through your service to properly identify these works for
online use?

 YES – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO OPINION

(a)[In particular if you are an end user/consumer or a right
holder):]Have you experienced problems when trying to be
remunerated for the use of the work you have created (on the
basis of pre-existing works)?

(b)[In particular if you are a service provider:]Do youprovide
remuneration schemes for users publishing/disseminating the
works they have created (on the basis of pre-existing works)
through your service?

 YES – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO– Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO OPINION

If there are problems, how would they best be solved?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

If your view is that a legislative solution is needed, what
would be its main elements? Which activities should be covered
and under what conditions?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

If your viewis that a different solution is needed, what would
it be?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Private copying and reprography

Directive 2001/29/EC enables Member States to implement in their
nationallegislation exceptions or limitations to the
reproduction right for copies made for private use and
photocopying55

Article 5. 2)(a) and (b) of Directive 2001/29.

. Levies are charges imposed at national level on goods
typically used for such purposes (blank media, recording
equipment, photocopying machines, mobile listening devices such
as mp3/mp4 players, computers, etc.) with a view to compensating
rightholders for the harm they suffer when copies are made
without their authorisation by certain categories of persons
(i.e. natural persons making copies for their private use) or
through use of certain technique (i.e. reprography). In that
context, levies are important for rightholders.

With the constant developments in digital technology, the
question arises as to whether the copying of files by
consumers/end-users who have purchased content online - e.g.
when a person has bought an MP3 file and goes on to store
multiple copies of that file (in her computer, her tablet and
her mobile phone) - also triggers,or should trigger, the
application of private copying levies. It is argued that, in
some cases, these levies may indeed be claimed by rightholders
whether or not the licence fee paid by the service provider
already covers copies made by the end user. Thisapproach could
potentially lead to instances of double payments whereby levies
could be claimed on top of service providers’ licence fees56

Communication "Unleashing the Potential of Cloud Computing in
Europe", COM(2012) 529 final.

57

These issues were addressed in the recommendations of Mr António
Vitorino resulting from the mediation on private copying and
reprography levies. You can consult these recommendations on
the following
website:http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/copyright/docs/levy_reform/130131_levies-vitorino-recommendations_en.pdf.

.

There is also an on-going discussion as to the application or
not of levies to certain types of cloud-based services such as
personal lockers or personal video recorders.

In your view, is there a need to clarify at the EU level the
scope and application of the private copying and reprography
exceptions58

Art. 5.2(a) and 5.2(b) of Directive 2001/29/EC.

in the digital environment?

 YES – Please explain

In the analog world, citizens are allowed to use the content
they legally acquired more freely. In the digital environment
the legality of private copying is uncertain and differs from
oneMember State to another. Can you legally move a book from
one place to another? Can you legally copy a file for private
uses on different devices? Moreover, the digital age should
permit easier access and uses of the content legally acquired,
instead copying and moving files is made harder. Let the
European Commission know if you think this is not justified.

 NO – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO OPINION

Should digital copies made by endusers for private purposes in
the context of a service that has been licensed by
rightholders, and where the harm to the rightholder is minimal,
be subject to private copying levies?59

This issue was also addressed in the recommendations of Mr
Antonio Vitorino resulting from the mediation on private
copying and reprography levies

 YES – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO – Please explain

This question mixes two issues. First: Do I want to pay
acopyright charge to copy an MP3 or an e-book for private uses
that you legally purchased and that do not unreasonably
prejudice the rightholders? No, I disagree with such a levy.
Second: More and more services licence the content, it means
that when you buy content online you are allow to copy it a
certain number of times only and this is calculated in the
price you pay. Therefore if you add a levy on top, you would be
paying twice. I disagree disagree with this system. Why I
disagree with these? When I payfor someting I already have paid
for the content and it's use. These levies mean in practise that
I wouldn't have to pay for the original content because levies
take care of that already. No. This is immoral and encourages
immoral behaviour. Leeching payment from enduser for multiple
times is immoral behaviour and only serves the interests of
person getting pthe payment. none else.

 NO OPINION

How would changes in levies with respect to the application to
online services (e.g. services based on cloudcomputing
allowing, for instance, users to have copies on different
devices) impact the development and functioning of new business
models on the one hand and rightholders’ revenue on the other?

[Open question]

Users should not have to pay additional random charges for
‘theoretical’ copyright infringements when using online
services. Businesses developing new online services need legal
certainty, and should not be burdened by levies that would
compensate a loss that is not proven. The European Union should
think about boosting creativity and innovation before adding
some extra-layers of burden.

Would you see an added value in making levies visible on the
invoices for products subject to levies?60

This issue was also addressed in the recommendations ofMr
Antonio Vitorino resulting from the mediation on private
copying and reprography levies.

 YES – Please explain

If a levy system applies, users should be informed about: 1) How
much is being charged; 2) For what purpose; and, 3) How the
money is beingused. Increased transparency means more trust
from consumers. Any mechanism that would educate the general
public about the fact and amounts of money collected and
distributed through such schemes as levies is thus a good idea.

 NO – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO OPINION

Diverging national systems levy different products and apply
different tariffs. This results in obstacles to the free
circulation of goods and services in the SingleMarket. At the
same time, many Member States continue to allow the
indiscriminate application of private copying levies to all
transactions irrespective of the person to whom the product
subject to a levy is sold (e.g. private person or business). In
thatcontext, not all Member States have ex ante exemption and/or
ex post reimbursement schemes which could remedy these
situations and reduce the number of undue payments61

This issue was also addressed in the recommendations of Mr
Antonio Vitorino resultingfrom the mediation on private copying
and reprography levies.

.

Have you experienced a situation where a cross-border
transaction resulted in undue levy payments, or duplicate
payments of the same levy, or other obstacles to the free
movement of goods orservices?

 YES – Please specify the type of transaction and indicate
the percentage of the undue payments. Please also indicate how
a priori exemption and/or ex post reimbursement schemes could
help to remedy the situation.

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO OPINION

What percentage of products subject to a levy is sold to persons
other than natural persons forpurposes clearly unrelated to
private copying? Do any of those transactions result in undue
payments? Please explain in detail the example you provide
(type of products, type of transaction, stakeholders, etc.).

[Open question]

Do you know that in many EU countries, the system in place
recognises citizens a right to do private copies and makes you
pay for a supposed harm suffered by the rightsholders for these
private copies - the private copying levy -, harm that has never
been defined nor proven? Moreover, you pay for copies of content
of which you are the author (back-up of your computer files,
memory cards in your photo or video cameras, printers…).You
also pay levies on devices you may not even use to copy
copyright protected content, for example if you use your phone
only to make calls or send messages. I disagree with this
system.

Where such undue payments arise, what percentage of trade do
they affect? To what extent could a priori exemptions and/or ex
post reimbursement schemes existing in someMember States help to
remedy the situation?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

If you have identified specific problems with the current
functioning of the levy system, how would these problemsbest be
solved?

[Open question]

This question mixes two issues. First: Do I want to pay a
copyright charge to copy an MP3 or an e-book for private uses
that you legally purchased and that do not unreasonably
prejudice the rightholders? No, I disagree withsuch a levy.
Second: More and more services licence the content, it means
that when you buy content online you are allow to copy it a
certain number of times only and this is calculated in the
price you pay. Therefore if you add a levy on top, you would
bepaying twice. I disagree disagree with this system. Why I
disagree with these? When I pay for someting I already have
paid for the content and it's use. These levies mean in
practise that I wouldn't have to pay for the original content
because levies takecare of that already. No. This is immoral
and encourages immoral behaviour. Leeching payment from enduser
for multiple times is immoral behaviour and only serves the
interests of person getting pthe payment. But there must be
such levy, then Increased transparency means more trust from
consumers. Any mechanism that would educate the general public
about the fact and amounts of money collected and distributed
through such schemes as levies is thus a good idea.

Fair remuneration of authors and performers

The EU copyright acquis recognises for authors and performers a
number of exclusive rights and, in the case of performers whose
performances are fixed in phonograms, remuneration rights. There
are few provisions in the EU copyright law governing
thetransferof rights from authors or performers to producers62

See e.g. Directive 92/100/EEC, Art.2(4)-(7).

or determining who the owner of the rights is when the work or
other subject matter is created in the context of an employment
contract63

See e.g. Art. 2.3.of Directive 2009/24/EC, Art. 4 of Directive
96/9/EC.

. This is an area that has been traditionally left for Member
States to regulate and there are significant differences in
regulatory approaches. Substantial differences also exist
between different sectors of the creative industries.

Concerns continue to be raised that authors and performers are
not adequately remunerated, in particular but not solely, as
regards online exploitation. Many consider that the economic
benefit of new forms of exploitation is not being fairly shared
along the whole value chain. Another commonly raised issue
concerns contractual practices, negotiation mechanisms,
presumptions of transfer of rights, buy-out clauses and the
lack of possibility to terminate contracts. Some stakeholders
are of the opinion that rules at national level do not suffice
to improve their situation and that action at EU level is
necessary.

[In particular if you are an author/performer:] What is the best
mechanism (or combination of mechanisms) toensure that you
receive an adequate remuneration for the exploitation of your
works and performances?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Is there a need to act at the EU level (for instance toprohibit
certain clauses in contracts)?

 YES – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO – Please explain why

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO OPINION

If you consider that the current rules are not effective, what
would you suggest to address the shortcomings you identify?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Respect for rights

Directive2004/48/EE64

Directive 2004/48/EC of the European Parliament and of the
Council of 29 April 2004 on the enforcement of intellectual
property rights.

provides for a harmonised framework for the civil enforcement of
intellectual property rights, including copyright and related
rights. The Commission has consulted broadly on this text65

You will find more information on the following
website:http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/iprenforcement/directive/index_en.htm

. Concerns have been raised as to whether some of its provisions
are still fit to ensure a proper respect for copyright in the
digital age. On the one hand, the current measures seem to be
insufficient to deal with the new challenges brought by the
dissemination of digital content on the internet; on the other
hand, there are concerns about the current balance between
enforcement of copyright and the protection of fundamental
rights, in particular the right for a private life and data
protection. While it cannot be contested that enforcement
measures should always be available in case of infringement of
copyright, measures could be proposed to strengthen respect for
copyright when the infringed content is usedfor a commercial
purpose66

For example when the infringing content is offered on a website
which gets advertising revenues that depend on the volume of
traffic.

. One means to do this could be to clarify the role of
intermediaries in the IP infrastructure67

This clarification should not affect the liability regime of
intermediary service providers established by Directive
2000/31/EC on electronic commerce, which will remain unchanged.

. At the same time, there could be clarification of the
safeguards for respect of private life and data protection for
private users.

Should the civil enforcement system in the EU be rendered more
efficient for infringements of copyright committed with a
commercial purpose?

 YES – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO OPINION

In particular, is the current legal framework clear enough to
allow for sufficientinvolvement of intermediaries (such as
Internet service providers, advertising brokers, payment
service providers, domain name registrars, etc.) in inhibiting
online copyright infringements with a commercial purpose? If
not, what measures would be useful to foster the cooperation of
intermediaries?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Does the current civil enforcement framework ensure that the
right balance is achieved between the right to have
one’scopyright respected and other rights such as the
protection of private life and protection of personal data?

 YES – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO – Please explain

the current copyrightsystem is completely tilted towards the
rightholders, and does not take users’ much into consideration,
if at all. Copyright should aim to encourage creativity and
innovation for the benefit of the society as a whole. However,
current copyright law fails to achieve its dual mission, as the
notion of consumers’ rights is absent. Consumers do not know
what they can and cannot do with copyright protected material.
The current legislation is simply out of date and fails to
respond to the challenges of the digital environment.

 NO OPINION

A single EU Copyright Title

The idea of establishing a unified EU Copyright Title has been
present in the copyright debate for quite some time now,
although views as to the merits and the feasibility of such an
objective are divided. A unified EU Copyright Title would
totally harmonise the area of copyright law in the EU and
replace national laws. There would then be a single EU title
instead of a bundle of national rights. Some see this as the
only manner in which a truly Single Market for content
protected by copyright can be ensured, while others believe
that the same objective can better be achieved by establishing
a higher level of harmonisation while allowing for a certain
degree of flexibility and specificity in Member States’ legal
systems.

Should the EU pursue the establishment of a single EU Copyright
Title, as a means of establishing a consistent framework for
rights and exceptions to copyright across the EU, as well as a
single framework for enforcement?

 YES

 NO

 NO OPINION

Should this be the next step in the development of copyright in
the EU? Does the current level of difference among the Member
State legislation mean that this is a longer term project?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Other issues

The above questionnaire aims to provide a comprehensive
consultation on the most important matters relating to the
current EU legal framework for copyright. Should any important
matters have been omitted,we would appreciate if you could
bring them to our attention, so they can be properly addressed
in the future.

Are there any other important matters related to the EU legal
framework for copyright? Please explain and indicate how such
matters should be addressed.

[Open question]

Users need to be protected from the adverse effects of Technical
Protection Measures (TPM)/Digital Rights Management (DRM).
Circumvention of TPMs must be allowed when exercising user
rights created by Exceptions and Limitations orwhen using
Public Domain works. Using DRM/TPMs to hinder or impede
privileged uses of a protected work or access to public domain
material should be sanctioned. There is also a problem due to
excessive enforcement of copyright in the EU notably due to.
misuses of the IPR Enforcement Directive, but also excessive
removal of content. This needs to be stopped and framed in a
proper manner, that balances the different rights and freedoms
at stake. This essay covers important differences between EU
and US law:
http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2338976 It
should be clarified that DRM should not interfere with any of
the legal flexibilities, rights or opportunities granted to
users of culture. Also DRM should not override the exceptions
and limtations codified in law. We want legislators to decide
what legal and technical rights people have and do now have.
Technology companies should not do that.

