


Public Consultation

on the review of the EU copyright rules

Contents

I.  Introduction  2

A.  Context ofthe consultation  2

B.  How to submit replies to this questionnaire  3

C.  Confidentiality  3

II.  Rights and the functioning of the Single Market  7

A.  Why is it not possible to access many online content
services from anywhere in Europe?  7

B.  Is there a need for more clarity as regards the scope of
what needs to be authorised (or not) in digital transmissions?
10

1.  The act of “making available”  10

2.  Two rights involved in a single act of exploitation  11

3.  Linking and browsing  12

4.  Download to own digital content  13

C.  Registration of works and other subject matter – is it a
good idea?  14

D.  How to improve the use and interoperability ofidentifiers
15

E.  Term of protection – is it appropriate?  15

III.  Limitations and exceptions in the Single Market  16

A.  Access to content in libraries andarchives  19

1.  Preservation and archiving  19

2.  Off-premises access to library collections  20

3.  E – lending  21

4.  Massdigitisation  22

B.  Teaching  23

C.  Research  25

D.  Disabilities  25

E.  Text and data mining  27

F.  User-generated content  28

IV.  Private copying and reprography  31

V.  Fair remuneration of authors and performers  33

VI.  Respect for rights  34

VII.  A single EU Copyright Title  36

VIII.  Other issues  36

Introduction

Context of the consultation

Over the last two decades, digital technology and the Internet
have reshaped the ways in which content iscreated, distributed,
and accessed. New opportunities have materialised for those that
create and produce content (e.g. a film, a novel, a song), for
new and existing distribution platforms, for institutions such
as libraries, for activities such as research and for citizens
who now expect to be able to access content – for information,
education or entertainment purposes – regardless of
geographical borders.

This new environment also presents challenges. One of them is
for the market to continue to adaptto new forms of distribution
and use. Another one is for the legislator to ensure that the
system of rights, limitations to rights and enforcement remains
appropriate and is adapted to the new environment. This
consultation focuses on the second of these challenges:
ensuring that the EU copyright regulatory framework stays fit
for purpose in the digital environment to support creation and
innovation, tap the full potential of the Single Market, foster
growth and investment in our economy and promote cultural
diversity.

In its "Communication on Content in the Digital Single Market"1

COM (2012)789 final, 18/12/2012.

the Commission set out two parallel tracks of action:on the one
hand, to complete its on-going effort to review and to
modernise the EU copyright legislative framework2

As announced in the Intellectual Property Strategy ' A single
market for Intellectual Property Rights: COM (2011)287 final,
24/05/2011.

3

"Based on market studies and impact assessment and legal
drafting work"as announced inthe Communication (2012)789.

with a view to a decision in 2014 on whether to table
legislative reform proposals, andon the other, to facilitate
practical industry-led solutions through the stakeholder
dialogue "Licences for Europe" on issues on which rapid
progress was deemed necessary and possible.

The "Licences for Europe" process has been finalised now4

See the document “Licences for Europe – tem pledges to bring
more content
online”:http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/copyright/docs/licences-for-europe/131113_ten-pledges_en.pdf.

. The Commission welcomes the practical solutions stakeholders
have put forward in this context and will monitor their
progress. Pledges have been made by stakeholders in all four
Working Groups (cross border portability of services,
user-generated content, audiovisual and film heritage and text
and data mining). Taken together, the Commission expects these
pledgesto be a further step in making the user environment
easier in many different situations. The Commission also takes
note of the fact that two groups – user-generated content and
text and data mining – did not reach consensus among
participating stakeholders on either the problems to be
addressed or on the results. The discussions and results of
"Licences for Europe" will be also taken into account in the
context of the review of the legislative framework.

As part of the review process, the Commission is nowlaunching a
public consultation on issues identified in the Communication
on Content in the Digital Single Market, i.e.:"territoriality
in the Internal Market, harmonisation, limitations and
exceptions to copyright in the digital age; fragmentation of
the EU copyright market; and how to improve the effectiveness
and efficiency of enforcement while underpinning its legitimacy
in the wider context of copyright reform". As highlighted in the
October 2013 European CouncilConclusions5

EUCO 169/13, 24/25 October 2013.

"Providing digital services and content across the single market
requires the establishment of a copyright regime for the digital
age. The Commission will therefore complete its on-going review
of the EU copyright framework in spring 2014. It isimportant to
modernise Europe's copyright regime and facilitate licensing,
while ensuring a high level protection of intellectual property
rights and taking into account cultural diversity".

This consultation builds on previous consultations and public
hearings, in particular those on the "Green Paper on copyright
in the knowledge economy"6

COM(2008)
466/3,http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/copyright/copyright-infso/index_en.htm#maincontentSec2.

, the "Green Paper on the online distribution of audiovisual
works"7

COM(2011) 427
final,http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/consultations/2011/audiovisual_en.htm.

and "Content Online"8

http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/consultations/2009/content_online_en.htm.

. These consultations provided valuable feedback from
stakeholders on a number of questions, on issues as diverse as
the territoriality of copyright and possible ways to overcome
territoriality, exceptions related to the online dissemination
of knowledge, and rightholders’ remuneration, particularly in
the audiovisual sector. Views were expressed by stakeholders
representing all stages in the value chain, including right
holders, distributors, consumers, and academics. The questions
elicited widely diverging views on the best way to proceed. The
"Green Paper on Copyright in the Knowledge Economy" was followed
up by a Communication. The replies to the "Green Paper on the
online distribution of audiovisual works" have fed into
subsequent discussions on the Collective Rights Management
Directive and into the current review process.

How to submit replies to this questionnaire

You are kindly asked to send your repliesby 5 February 2014as a
word or pdf document to the following e-mail address of DG
Internal Market and
Services:markt-copyright-consultation@ec.europa.eu. Please note
that replies sent after that date will not be taken into
account.

This consultation is addressed to different categories of
stakeholders. To the extent possible, the questions indicate
the category/ies of respondents most likely to be concerned by
them (annotation in brackets, before the actual question).
Respondents should nevertheless feel free to reply to any/all
of the questions. Also, please note that, apart from the
question concerning the identification of the respondent, none
of the questions is obligatory. Replies containing answers only
to part of the questions will be also accepted.

You are requested to provide your answers directly within this
consultation document. For the “Yes/No/No opinion” questions
please put the selected answer inboldandunderlineit so it is
easy for us to see your selection.

In your answers to the questions, you are invited to refer to
the situation in EU Member States.You are also invited in
particular to indicate, where relevant, what would be the
impact of options you put forward in terms of costs,
opportunities and revenues.

The public consultation is available in English. Responses may,
however, be sent in any of the 24 official languages of the EU.

Confidentiality

The contributions received in this round of consultation as well
as a summary report presenting the responses in a statistical
and aggregated form will be published on the website of DG
MARKT.

Please note that all contributions received will be published
together with the identity of the contributor, unless the
contributor objects to the publication of their personal data
on the grounds that such publication would harm his or her
legitimate interests. Inthis case, the contribution will be
published in anonymous form upon the contributor's explicit
request. Otherwise the contribution will not be published nor
will its content be reflected in the summary report.

Pleaseread ourPrivacy statement.

Please identify yourself:

Name:

…………………………………………………………………………………………………..

…………………………………………………………………………………………………..

In the interests of transparency, organisations (including, for
example, NGOs, trade associations and commercial enterprises)
are invited to provide the public with relevant information
about themselves by registering in the Interest Representative
Register and subscribing to its Code of Conduct.

If you are a Registered organisation, please indicate your
Register ID number below. Your contribution will then be
considered as representing the views of your organisation.

…………………………………………………………………………………………………..

…………………………………………………………………………………………………..

If your organisation is not registered, you have the opportunity
toregister now. Responses from organisations not registered will
be published separately.

If you would like to submit your reply on an anonymous basis
please indicate it belowby underlining the following answer:

Yes, I would like to submit my reply on an anonymous basis

Type of respondent(Pleaseunderlinethe appropriate):

End user/consumer(e.g. internet user, reader, subscriber to
music or audiovisual service, researcher, student) OR
Representative of end users/consumers

for the purposes of this questionnaire normally referredto in
questions as"end users/consumers"

Institutional user(e.g. school, university, research centre,
library, archive) OR Representative of institutional users

for the purposes of this questionnaire normally referred to
in questions as"institutional users"

Author/Performer OR Representative of authors/performers

Publisher/Producer/Broadcaster OR Representative of
publishers/producers/broadcasters

the two above categoriesare,for the purposes of this
questionnaire, normally referred to in questions as"right
holders"

Intermediary/Distributor/Other service provider(e.g. online
music or audiovisual service, games platform, social media,
search engine, ICT industry)OR Representative of
intermediaries/distributors/other service providers

for the purposes of this questionnaire normally referred to
in questions as"service providers"

√Collective Management Organisation

Public authority

Member State

Other(Please explain):

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Rights and the functioning of the Single Market

Why is it not possible to access many online content services
from anywhere in Europe?

Along with rights issues, there are a number of commercial and
economic factorsbeyond rights which influence any business
decision to launch in a specific EEA territory. The potential
return from certain markets based on [cost of sales, dominance
of an indigenous service, regulatory issues such as ‘codes of
conduct’, VAT implications, strategy e.g. the decision to only
launch with a local partner to reduce risk, disposable
expenditure of target market, IT infrastructure such as level
of broadband infrastructure.] The list goes on. It is often
very easy for a service provider to state‘due to rights issues
this service is not available in your territory’ on their
platform website. There a number of broader factors that also
needs to be considered.

[The territorial scope of the rights involved in digital
transmissions and thesegmentation of the market through
licensing agreements]

Holders of copyright and related rights – e.g. writers, singers,
musicians - do not enjoy a single protection in the EU. Instead,
they are protected on the basis of a bundle of national rights
in each Member State. Those rights have been largely harmonised
by the existing EU Directives. However, differences remain and
the geographical scope of the rights is limited to the
territory of the Member State granting them. Copyright is thus
territorial in the sense that rights are acquired and enforced
on a country-by-country basis under national law9

This principle has been confirmed by the Court of justice on
several occasions.

.

The dissemination of copyright-protected content on the Internet
– e.g. by amusic streaming service, or by an online e-book
seller – therefore requires, in principle, an authorisation for
each national territory in which the content is communicated to
the public. Rightholders are, of course, in a position to grant
a multi-territorial or pan-European licence, such that content
services can be provided in several Member States and across
borders. A number of steps have been taken at EU level to
facilitate multi-territorial licences: the proposal for a
Directive on Collective RightsManagement10

Proposal for a Directive of the European Parliament and of the
Council of 11 July 2012 on collective management of copyright
and related rights and multi-territorial licensing of rights in
musical works for online uses in the internal market,COM(2012)
372 final.

should significantly facilitate the delivery of
multi-territorial licences in musical works for online
services11

Collective Management Organisations play a significant role in
the management of online rights for musical works incontrast to
the situation where online rights are licensed directly by right
holders such as film or record producers or by newspaper or book
publishers.

; the structured stakeholder dialogue “Licences for Europe”12

You can find more information on the following website:
http://ec.europa.eu/licences-for-europe-dialogue/.

and market-led developments such as the on-going work in the
Linked Content Coalition13

You can find more information on the following
website:http://www.linkedcontentcoalition.org/.

.

"Licences for Europe" addressed in particular the specific issue
of cross-border portability, i.e. the ability of consumers
having subscribed to online services in their Member State to
keep accessing them when travelling temporarily to other Member
States. As a result, representatives of the audio-visual sector
issued a joint statement affirming their commitment to continue
working towardsthe further development of cross-border
portability14

See the document “Licences for Europe – tem pledges to bring
more content
online”:http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/copyright/docs/licences-for-europe/131113_ten-pledges_en.pdf.

.

Despite progress, there are continued problems with the
cross-border provision of, and access to, services. These
problems are most obvious to consumers wantingto access
services that are made available in Member States other than
the one in which they live. Not all online services are
available in all Member States and consumers face problems when
trying to access such services across borders. In some
instances, even if the “same” service is available in all
Member States, consumers cannot access the service across
borders (they can only access their “national” service, and if
they try to access the "same" service in another Member State
they are redirected to the one designated for their country of
residence).

This situation may in part stem from the territoriality of
rights and difficulties associated with the clearing of rights
in different territories. Contractual clauses in licensing
agreements between right holders and distributors and/or
between distributors and end users may also be at the origin of
some of the problems (denial of access, redirection).

The main issue at stake here is, therefore, whether further
measures (legislative or non-legislative, including market-led
solutions) need to be taken at EU level in the medium term15

For possible long term measures such as the establishment of a
European Copyright Code (establishing a single title) see
section VII of this consultation document.

to increasethe cross-border availability of content services in
the Single Market, while ensuring an adequate level of
protection for right holders.

[In particular if you are an end user/consumer:]Have you faced
problems when trying to access online services in anEU Member
State other than the one in which you live?

√YES- Please provide examples indicating the Member State, the
sector and the type of content concerned (e.g. premium content
such as certain films and TV series, audio-visual content in
general, music, e-books, magazines, journals and newspapers,
games, applications and other software)

Accessing the general entertainment platform (Netflix) in
Germany, type of content was Movies and TV programming (Feb
2014).

[In particular if you are a service provider:]Have you faced
problems when seeking to provide online services across borders
in the EU?

 YES - Please explain whether such problems, in your
experience, are related to copyright or to other issues (e.g.
business decisions relating to the cost ofproviding services
across borders, compliance with other laws such as consumer
protection)? Please provide examples indicating the Member
State, the sector and the type of content concerned (e.g.
premium content such as certain films and TV series,
audio-visual content in general, music, e-books, magazines,
journals and newspapers, games, applications and other
software).

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

[In particular if you are a right holder or a collective
management organisation:]How often are you asked to grant
multi-territorial licences? Please indicate, if possible, the
number of requests per year and provide examples indicating the
Member State, the sector and the type of content concerned.

1-5 timesper annum from indigenous companies, primarily audio
visual based (online and traditional broadcast services)

Via PRS (where IMRO’s pan-European rights rest, we receive such
requests between 15 -20 times per annum. The service area
primarily music orientated and the scope of coverage primarily
focuses on countries residing within the EEA. Over the last
12-24 months PRS have sought the extension of our rights into
further regions within Europe where collective management of
rights is less advanced.

If youhave identified problems in the answers to any of the
questions above – what would be the best way to tackle them?

a.  Recent European initiatives have shown that the EU
legislative framework on copyright does not constitute a
problem in terms of theavailability and portability of online
services offering copyright protected works across the EU.

b.  IMRO believes that collective management and voluntary
aggregation of rights in the hands of CMOs is the most
effective way to address music rights clearance for the
cross-border availability and portability of creative content
services.

c.  The new CRM Directive aims at promoting cross-border
licensing of musical works and addressing any outstanding
issues. Therefore, it would be premature to envisage any
further initiative before its implementation.

[In particular if you are a right holder or a collective
management organisation:]Are there reasons why, even in cases
where you hold all the necessary rights for all the territories
in question, you wouldstill find it necessary or justified to
impose territorial restrictions on a service provider (in
order, for instance, to ensure that access to certain content
is not possible in certain European countries)?

 NO

For commercial reasons either the provideror the collection
society could choose to limit the scope of coverage.

In addition in some cases a provider may not be able to provide
adequate reporting for certain territories. This factor would
also need to be considered. See II A above. In some casesthe
potential monetary return in one jurisdiction may not warrant
full investment (by the service provider) in localised staff to
deal with reporting adequately.

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

[In particularif you are e.g. a broadcaster or a service
provider:]Are there reasons why, even in cases where you have
acquired all the necessary rights for all the territories in
question, you would still find it necessary or justified to
impose territorial restrictions on the service recipient (in
order for instance, to redirect the consumer to a different
website than the one he is trying to access)?

 YES – Please explain by giving examples

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO

 NO OPINION

Do you think that further measures (legislative or
non-legislative, including market-led solutions) are needed at
EU level to increase the cross-border availability of content
services in the Single Market, while ensuring an adequatelevel
of protection for right holders?

 NO

As presented during the Licences for Europe initiative, there is
no need for a legislative change to increase the cross-border
availability of content services as (i) these constantly
develop, (ii) the currentcopyright framework is not an obstacle
to their growth and (iii) the CRM Directive aims at promoting
cross-border licensing.

B. Is there a need for more clarity as regards the scope of what
needs to be authorised (or not) in digital transmissions?[The
definition of the rights involved in digital transmissions]

The EU framework for the protection of copyright and related
rights in the digital environment is largely established by
Directive 2001/29/EC16

Directive 2001/29/EC of the European Parliament and of the
Council of 22 May 2001 on the harmonisation of certain aspects
of copyright and related rights in the information society.

on the harmonisation of certain aspects of copyright and related
rights in the information society. OtherEU directives in
thisfield that are relevant in the online environment are those
relating to the protection of software17

Directive 2009/24/EC of the European Parliament and of the
Council of 23 April 2009 on the legal protection of computer
programs.

and databases18

Directive 96/9/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council
of 11 March 1996 on the legal protection of databases.

.

Directive 2001/29/ECharmonises the rights of authors and
neighbouring rightholders19

Film and record producers, performers and broadcastersare
holders of so-called “neighbouring rights” in, respectively,
their films, records, performances and broadcast. Authors’
content protected by copyright is referred to as a “work” or
“works”, while content protected by neighbouring rights is
referred toas “other subject matter”.

which are essential for the transmission of digital copies of
works (e.g. an e-book) and other protected subject matter (e.g.
a record in a MP3 format) over the internet or similar digital
networks.

The most relevant rights fordigital transmissions are the
reproduction right, i.e. the right to authorise or prohibit the
making of copies20

The right to “authorise or prohibit direct or indirect,
temporary or permanent reproduction by any means and in any
form, in whole or inpart” (see Art. 2 of Directive 2001/29/EC)
although temporary acts of reproduction of a transient or
incidental nature are, under certain conditions, excluded (see
art. 5(1) of Directive 2001/29/EC).

, (notably relevant at the start of the transmission – e.g. the
uploading of a digital copy of a work to a server in view of
making it available – and at the users’ end – e.g. when a user
downloads a digital copy of a work) and the communication to
the public/making available right, i.e. the rights to
authoriseor prohibit the dissemination of the works in digital
networks21

The right to authorise or prohibit any communication to the
public by wire or wireless means and to authorise or prohibit
the making available to the public “on demand” (see Art. 3 of
Directive 2001/29/EC).

. These rights are intrinsically linked in digital transmissions
and both need to be cleared.

The act of “making available”

Directive 2001/29/EC specifies neitherwhatis covered by the
making available right (e.g. the upload, theaccessibility by
the public, the actual reception by the public) norwherethe act
of “making available” takes place. This does not raise questions
if the act is limited to a single territory. Questions arise
however when the transmission covers several territories and
rights need to be cleared (does the act of "making available"
happen in the country of the upload only? in each of the
countries where the content is potentially accessible? in each
of the countries where the content is effectively accessed?).
The most recent case law of the Court of Justice of the
European Union (CJEU) suggests that a relevant criterion is the
“targeting” of a certain Member State's public22

See in particular Case C-173/11 (Football Dataco vs Sportradar)
and Case C-5/11 (Donner) for copyright and related rights, and
Case C-324/09 (L’Oréal vs eBay) for trademarks. With regard to
jurisdiction see also joined Cases C-585/08 and C-144/09
(Pammer and Hotel Alpenhof) and pending CaseC-441/13 (Pez
Hejduk); see however, adopting a different approach, Case
C-170/12 (Pinckney vs KDG Mediatech).

. According to this approach the copyright-relevant act (which
has to be licensed) occurs at least in those countries which
are “targeted” by the online service provider. A service
provider “targets” a group of customers residing in a specific
country when it directs its activity to that group, e.g. via
advertisement, promotions, a language or a currency
specifically targeted at that group.

Is the scope of the “making available” right in cross-border
situations – i.e. when content is disseminated across borders –
sufficiently clear?

 YES

1)  There does not appear to be any problem in practice where
the scope of the making available right is concerned.

2)  The “country of origin principle” is certainly not
acceptable. It goes against the interests that the InfoSoc
Directive aims to protect and it is incapable of solving any of
the problems presented in the DeWolf Study.

[In particular if you are a right holder:]Could a clarification
of the territorial scope of the “making available” right have
an effect on the recognition of your rights (e.g. whether you
are considered to be an author or not, whether you are
considered to have transferred your rights or not), on your
remuneration, or on the enforcement of rights (including the
availability of injunctive relief23

Injunctive relief is a temporary or permanent remedy allowing
the right holder to stop or prevent an infringement of his/her
right.

)?

 NO

There is no practical problem relating to the territorial scope
of the making available right as presented in answer to
Question 8 above.

Two rights involved in a single act of exploitation

Each act of transmission in digital networks entails (in the
current state of technology and law) severalreproductions. This
means that there are two rights that apply to digital
transmissions: the reproduction right and the making available
right. This may complicate the licensing of works for online
use notably when the two rights are held by different
persons/entities.

[In particular if you a service provider or a right holder:]Does
the application of two rights to a single act of economic
exploitation in the online environment (e.g. a download) create
problems for you?

 NO

1)  The application of two different rights to a certain type of
exploitation is not a new development. Online exploitation is
not the first type of use for which clearance of reproduction
and communication to the public rights is required in
combination. It has long been the case forboth radio and
television - including satellite – broadcasting and it has
never raised any difficulty because the CMOs offer these rights
within a same authorisation.

2)  This situation has never created any problem or difficulty
since rightholders cooperate with each other to provide the
service providers with what is necessary to easily clear the
relevant rights needed to operate their services.

Linking and browsing

Hyperlinks are references to data that lead a user from one
location in the Internetto another. They are indispensable for
the functioning of the Internet as a network. Several cases are
pending before the CJEU24

Cases C-466/12 (Svensson), C-348/13 (Bestwater International)
and C-279/13 (C More entertainment).

in which the question has been raised whether the provision of
a clickable link constitutes an act of communication to the
public/making available to the public subject to the
authorisation of the rightholder.

A user browsing the internet (e.g. viewing a web-page) regularly
creates temporary copies of works and other subject-matter
protected under copyright on the screen and in the 'cache'
memory of his computer. A question has been referred to the
CJEU25

Case C-360/13 (Public Relations Consultants Association Ltd).
See
alsohttp://www.supremecourt.gov.uk/decided-cases/docs/UKSC_2011_0202_PressSummary.pdf.

as to whether such copies are always covered by the mandatory
exception fortemporary acts of reproduction provided for in
Article 5(1) of Directive 2001/29/EC.

Should the provision of a hyperlink leading to a work or other
subject matter protected under copyright, either in general or
under specific circumstances, be subject to the authorisation
of the rightholder?

 YES – Please explain whether you consider this to be the
case in general, or under specific circumstances, and why

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO – Please explainwhether you consider this to be the case
in general, or under specific circumstances, and why (e.g.
because it does not amount to an act of communication to the
public – or to a new public, or because it should be covered by
a copyright exception)

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO OPINION

Should the viewing of a web-page where this implies the
temporary reproduction of a work or other subject matter
protected under copyright on the screen and in the cache memory
of the user’s computer, either in general or under specific
circumstances, be subject to the authorisation of the
rightholder?

YES –

The copies made in order to view web pages should be subject to
the authorisation of the rightsholder.

If thecopies made for the purpose of enabling individuals to
view web-pages did not require the authorisation of the
copyright owner, it would enable businesses to monetise
unauthorised content and detract from legal offers. It is clear
therefore that copies made to enable use of the work by
web-browsing have in relation to the service provider (if not
the browser)independent economic significance additional to
that derived from the copies made to enablethe transmission of
the work, namely the fact that they can be viewed/heard by the
visitors to the service provider’s web-page. An exception that
removes the making of such copies from rightholder
authorisation would severely prejudice the legitimate interests
of rightholders (and to that extent would be is contrary to Art
5(5) Infosoc Directive).

The liability also assists in enforcement against the service as
it gives the services liability for authorising or having
secondary liability for the consumers’ infringements. This is
particularly helpful where theservice is located in a
jurisdiction with weak copyright law.

Download to own digital content

Digital content is increasingly being bought via digital
transmission (e.g. download to own). Questions arise as to the
possibility for users to dispose of thefiles they buy in this
manner (e.g. by selling them or by giving them as a gift). The
principle of EU exhaustion of the distribution right applies in
the case of the distribution of physical copies (e.g. when a
tangible article such as a CD or a book, etc.is sold, the right
holder cannot prevent the further distribution of that tangible
article)26

See also recital 28 of Directive 2001/29/EC.

. The issue that arises here is whether this principle can also
be applied in the case of an act of transmission equivalent in
its effect to distribution (i.e. where the buyer acquires the
property of the copy)27

In Case C-128/11 (Oracle vs. UsedSoft) the CJEU ruled that an
author cannot oppose the resale of a second-hand licence that
allows downloading his computer program from his website and
using it for an unlimited period of time. The exclusive right
of distribution of a copy of a computer program covered by such
a licence is exhausted on its first sale. While it is thus
admitted that the distribution right may besubject to
exhaustion in case of computer programs offered for download
with the right holder’s consent, the Court was careful to
emphasise that it reached this decision based on the Computer
Programs Directive. It was stressed that this exhaustion rule
constituted alex specialisin relation to the Information
Society Directive (UsedSoft, par. 51, 56).

. This raises difficult questions, notably relating to the
practical application of such an approach (how to avoid
re-sellers keeping and using a copy ofa work after they have
“re-sold” it – this is often referred to as the “forward and
delete” question) as well as to the economic implications of
the creation of a second-hand market of copies of perfect
quality that never deteriorate (in contrast to the second-hand
market for physical goods).

[In particular if you are an end user/consumer:]Have you faced
restrictions when trying to resell digital files that you have
purchased (e.g. mp3 file, e-book)?

 YES – Please explain by giving examples

 NO

 NOOPINION

[In particular if you are a right holder or a service provider:]
What would be the consequences of providing a legal framework
enabling the resale of previously purchased digital content?
Please specify per market (type of content) concerned.

Application of the exhaustion principle to digital transmissions
under the InfoSoc Directive would have significant economic and
legal implications:

1. Economically:

(a) since resellers might not destroy originals (which cannot be
verified), the very justification of the application of the
principle would be missing and

(b) as the resold file is identical to the original, prices for
the original files will be driven down inexorably. There is
therefore significant foreseeable harm to authors, publishers
and toonline services in terms of the impact on supply and
value in the market.

2. The legal basis of such a proposition would also be totally
unjustified since:

- only the distribution right can be subject to exhaustion;

- the key criterion to determine whether there is reproduction
or distribution is the existence of a fixation of a work on
different carriers;

- downloading necessarily involves the [carrying out of a]
reproduction right since a downloaded work must, upon each
download, be fixed on a differentcarrier. The deletion of the
original file from which the downloads were operated is
indifferent to the exercise of the reproduction right which
occurs upon each fixation of the work

- downloading necessarily involves the [carrying out of]
communication topublic right since the downloaded work is (i)
upon each download, made available to the public so that anyone
can access it from anywhere and at any time he chooses and (ii)
transmitted by wire or wireless means.

Therefore reselling of copyright protectedworks cannot lead to
exhaustion, since the transmission and download necessarily
implies a reproduction and a communication to the public

Registration of works and other subject matter – is it a good
idea?

Registration is not often discussed in copyrightin the EU as the
existing international treaties in the area prohibit formalities
as a condition for the protection and exercise of rights.
However, this prohibition is not absolute28

For example, it does not affect “domestic” works – i.e.
worksoriginating in the country imposing the formalities as
opposed to works originating in another country.

. Moreover a system of registration does not need to be made
compulsory or constitute a precondition for the protection and
exercise of rights. With a longer term of protection and with
the increased opportunities that digital technology provides
for the use of content (including older works and works that
otherwise would not have been disseminated), the advantages and
disadvantages of a system of registration are increasingly being
considered29

On the basis of Article 3.6 of the Directive 2012/28/EU of the
European Parliament and of the Council of 25 October 2012 on
certain permitted uses of orphan works, a publicly accessible
online database is currentlybeing set up by the Office for
Harmonisation of the Internal Market (OHIM) for the
registration of orphan works.

.

Would the creation of a registration system at EU level help in
the identification and licensing of works and other subject
matter?

 NO

What would be the possible advantages of such a system?

What would be the possible disadvantages of such a system?

What incentives for registration by rightholders could be
envisaged?

1)  Collective management organisations are already
maintainingvoluntary registration databases which are a source
of comprehensive rights’ information and they are constantly
working on addressing the evolving needs of the market.

2)  The creation of a registration system at EU level is
therefore unnecessary and, onthe contrary, would be
counterproductive and also detrimental.

3)  Only major rightholders that would be able and/or have the
means to use a European system would also register their rights
in parallel to already existing databases: this would create two
levels of protection, which would be to the detriment of smaller
rightholders and create confusion and legal uncertainty for the
users.

4)  Moreover, envisaging a registry system that would become a
condition for the protection and exercise of rights wouldalso
be in contradiction with the Berne Convention and TRIPS
Agreement

How to improve the use and interoperability of identifiers

There are many private databases of works and other subject
matter held by producers, collective management organisations,
andinstitutions such as libraries, which are based to a greater
or lesser extent on the use of (more or less) interoperable,
internationally agreed ‘identifiers’. Identifiers can be
compared to a reference number embedded in a work, are specific
to the sector in which they have been developed30

E.g. the International Standard Recording Code (ISRC) is used to
identify recordings, the International Standard Book Number
(ISBN) is used to identify books.

, and identify, variously, the work itself, the owner or the
contributor to a work or other subject matter. There are
notable examples of where industry is undertaking actions to
improve the interoperability of such identifiers and databases.
The Global Repertoire Database31

You will find more information about this initiative on the
following website:http://www.globalrepertoiredatabase.com/.

should, once operational, provide a single source of information
on the ownership and control of musical works worldwide. The
Linked Content Coalition32

You will find more information about this initiative (funded in
part by the European Commission) on the following website:
www.linkedcontentcoalition.org.

was established to develop building blocks for the expressionand
management of rights and licensing across all content and media
types. It includes the development of a Rights Reference Model
(RRM) – a comprehensive data model for all types of rights in
all types of content. The UK Copyright Hub33

You will findmore information about this initiative on the
following website:http://www.copyrighthub.co.uk/.

is seeking to take such identification systems a step further,
and to create a linked platform, enabling automated licensing
across different sectors.

What should be the role of the EU in promoting the adoption
of identifiers in the content sector, and in promoting the
development and interoperability of rights ownership and
permissions databases?

Common standards have been developed over decades (ISWC, DOI,
ISRC, ISBN, IPI, etc.). Particularly for on line exploitation
of music some standard formats for identifiers and data
exchange are already in place as voluntary industry initiatives
and are used by societies,rightholders and DSPs. The DDEX format
(Digital Data Exchange) is developed constantly to meet the
digital business needs, based on the cooperation of different
stakeholders.

They require investment and ongoing costs to maintain but more
important thanthat they need to be actively adopted and used by
the entire supply chain. Such investments by rightsholders
cannot be made in isolation or without the clear commitment
from producers, broadcasters and users of rights and
intermediaries to adopt systems so that they materially improve
the quality of data provided to rightsholders. The European
Commission could facilitate such agreements, using their
convening powers, and assist in the endorsement and funding of
new initiatives.

Term of protection – is itappropriate?

Works and other subject matter are protected under copyright for
a limited period of time. After the term of protection has
expired, a work falls into the public domain and can be freely
used by anyone (in accordance with the applicable national
rules on moral rights). The Berne Convention34

Berne Convention for the Protection of Literary and Artistic
Works,http://www.wipo.int/treaties/en/ip/berne/.

requires a minimum term of protection of 50 years after the
death of the author. The EU rules extend this term of
protection to 70 years after the death of the author (as do
many other countries, e.g. the US).

With regard to performers in the music sector and phonogram
producers, the termprovided for in the EU rules also extend 20
years beyond what is mandated in international agreements,
providing for a term of protection of 70 years after the first
publication. Performers and producers in the audio-visual
sector, however, do not benefitfrom such an extended term of
protection.

Are the current terms of copyright protection still appropriate
in the digital environment?

 YES

1)  Shortening the term of protection would limit the ability of
creators to determine the best way to exploittheir rights based
on the period of exclusivity they enjoy in a context where
copyright protected works can be better preserved for a longer
time.

2)  Considering such a harmful option – in this respect, the
importance of the cultural industry in the EU economy should
not be forgotten – without any economic assessment is highly
questionable, all the more so as the life of the author and 70
years after his/her death is a term of protection which is
adopted in a large part of the world.

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Limitations and exceptions in the Single Market

Limitations and exceptions to copyright and related rights
enable the use of works and other protected subject-matter,
without obtaining authorisation from the rightholders, for
certain purposes and to a certain extent (for instance the use
for illustration purposes of an extract from a novel by a
teacher in a literature class). At EU level they are
established in a number of copyright directives, most notably
Directive 2001/29/EC35

Plus Directive 96/9/ECon the legal protection of
databases;Directive 2009/24/ECon the legal protection of
computer programs,and Directive 92/100/ECon rental right and
lending right.

.

Exceptions and limitations in the national and EU copyright laws
have torespect international law36

Article 9(2) of the Berne Convention for the Protection of
Literary and Artistic Works (1971); Article 13 of the TRIPS
Agreement (Trade Related Intellectual Property Rights) 1994;
Article 16(2) of the WIPO Performers and Phonograms Treaty
(1996); Article 9(2) of the WIPO Copyright Treaty (1996).

. In accordance with international obligations, the EU acquis
requires that limitations and exceptions can only be applied in
certain special cases which do not conflict with a normal
exploitation of the work or other subject matter and do not
unreasonably prejudice the legitimate interest of the
rightholders.

Whereas the catalogue of limitations and exceptions included in
EU law is exhaustive (no other exceptions can be applied to the
rights harmonised at EU level)37

Other than the grandfathering of the exceptions of minor
importance for analogue uses existing in Member States at the
time of adoption of Directive 2001/29/EC (see, Art. 5(3)(o)).

, these limitations and exceptions are often optional38

With the exception of certain limitations: (i) in the Computer
Programs Directive, (ii) in the Database Directive, (iii)
Article 5(1) in the Directive 2001/29/EC and (iv) the Orphan
Works Directive.

, in the sense that Member States are free to reflect in
national legislation as many or as few of them as they wish.
Moreover, the formulation of certain of the limitations and
exceptions is general enough to give significant flexibility to
the Member States as to how, and to what extent, to implement
them (if they decide to do so). Finally, it is worth noting
that not all of the limitations and exceptions included in the
EU legal framework for copyright are of equivalent significance
in policy terms and in terms of their potential effect on the
functioning of the Single Market.

In addition, in the same manner that the definition of the
rights is territorial (i.e. has an effect only within the
territory of the Member State), the definition of the
limitations and exceptions to the rights is territorial too (so
an act that is covered by an exception in a Member State "A" may
still require the authorisation of the rightholder once we move
to the Member State "B")39

Only the exception established in the recent Orphan Works
Directive (a mandatory exception to copyright and related
rights in the case where the rightholders are not known or
cannot be located) has been given a cross-border effect, which
means that, for instance, once a literary work – for instance a
novel – is considered an orphan work in aMember State, that same
novel shall be considered an orphan work in all Member States
and can be used and accessed in all Member States.

.

The cross-border effect of limitations and exceptions also
raises the question of fair compensation of rightholders.In
some instances, Member States are obliged to compensate
rightholders for the harm inflicted on them by a limitation or
exception to their rights. In other instances Member States are
not obliged, but may decide, to provide for such compensation.
If a limitation or exception triggering a mechanism of fair
compensation were to be given cross-border effect (e.g. the
books are used for illustration in an online course given by an
university in a Member State "A" and the students are in a
Member State "B") then there would also be a need to clarify
which national law should determine the level of that
compensation and who should pay it.

Finally, the question of flexibility and adaptability is being
raised: what is the best mechanism to ensure that the EU and
Member States’ regulatory frameworks adapt when necessary
(either to clarify that certain uses are covered by an
exception or to confirm that for certain uses the authorisation
of rightholders is required)? The main question here is whether
a greater degreeof flexibility can be introduced in the EU and
Member States regulatory framework while ensuring the required
legal certainty, including for the functioning of the Single
Market, and respecting the EU's international obligations.

Are there problems arising from the fact that most limitations
and exceptions provided in the EU copyright directives are
optional for the Member States?

Should some/all of the exceptions be made mandatory and, if so,
is there a need for a higher level of harmonisation of
suchexceptions?

Should any new limitations and exceptions be added to or removed
from the existing catalogue?Please explain by referring to
specific cases.

Independently from the questions above, is there a need to
provide for a greater degree offlexibility in the EU regulatory
framework for limitations and exceptions?

If yes, what would be the best approach to provide for
flexibility? (e.g. interpretation by national courts and the
ECJ, periodic revisions of the directives, interpretations
bythe Commission, built-in flexibility, e.g. in the form of a
fair-use or fair dealing provision / open norm, etc.)? Please
explain indicating what would be the relative advantages and
disadvantages of such an approach as well as its possible
effects on thefunctioning of the Internal Market.

Does the territoriality of limitations and exceptions, in your
experience, constitute a problem?

In the event that limitations and exceptions established at
national level were to have cross-border effect, how should the
question of “fair compensation” be addressed, when such
compensation is part of the exception? (e.g. who pays whom,
where?)

1)  IMRO is of the opinion that current EU law and international
treaties provide the necessary flexibility for copyright and
exceptions and limitations thereto.

2)  There is no need to introduce any new exception or to make
the available exceptions under the InfoSoc Directive mandatory,
since there is no evidenced need for such a legislative change.

3)  CMOs provide the necessary solutions for widespread access
to works through dedicated licensing for e.g. teaching,
educational institutions, research, etc., so that an exception
is not required to give access. These solutions are more
flexible, broader and give more clarity on termsand conditions
of use of works.

4)  IMRO is fundamentally against the introduction of a US-type
fair use exception in Europe. Fair use is incompatible with the
EU legal system and tradition, would only create legal
uncertainty and give rise to a higher number of disputes and
court cases which would be fundamentally in contradiction with
the Single Market objectives.

Access to content in libraries and archives

Directive 2001/29/EC enables Member States to reflect in their
national law a range oflimitations and exceptions for the
benefit of publicly accessible libraries, educational
establishments and museums, as well as archives. If
implemented, these exceptions allow actsof preservation and
archiving40

Article 5(2)c of Directive 2001/29.

and enable on-site consultation of the works and other subject
matter in the collections of such institutions41

Article 5(3)n of Directive 2001/29.

. The public lending (under an exception or limitation) by these
establishments of physical copies of works and other subject
matter is governed by the Rental and Lending Directive42

Article 5 of Directive 2006/115/EC.

.

Questions arise as to whether the current framework continues to
achieve the objectives envisaged or whether it needs to be
clarified or updated tocover use in digital networks. At the
same time, questions arise as to the effect of such a possible
expansion on the normal exploitation of works and other subject
matter and as to the prejudice this may cause to rightholders.
The role of licensing and possible framework agreements between
different stakeholders also needs to be considered here.

Preservation and archiving

The preservation of the copies of works or other subject-matter
held in the collections of cultural establishments (e.g. books,
records, or films) – the restoration or replacement of works,
the copying of fragile works - may involve the creation of
another copy/ies of these works or other subject matter. Most
Member States provide for an exception in their national laws
allowing for themaking of such preservation copies. The scope
of the exception differs from Member State to Member State (as
regards the type of beneficiary establishments, the types of
works/subject-matter covered by the exception, the mode of
copying and the number of reproductions that a beneficiary
establishment may make). Also, the current legal status of new
types of preservation activities (e.g. harvesting and archiving
publicly available web content) is often uncertain.

(a)[In particular if you are an institutional user:]Have you
experienced specific problems when trying to use an exception
to preserve and archive specific works or other subject matter
in your collection?

(b)[In particular if you are a right holder:]Have you
experienced problems with the use bylibraries, educational
establishments, museum or archives of the preservation
exception?

 YES – Please explain, by Member State, sector, and the type
of use in question.

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO

NO OPINION

If there are problems, how would they best be solved?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

If your view is that a legislative solution is needed, what
would be its main elements? Whichactivities of the beneficiary
institutions should be covered and under which conditions?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

If your view is that a different solution is needed, what would
it be?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Off-premises access to library collections

Directive 2001/29/EC provides an exception for the consultation
of works and other subject-matter (consulting an
e-book,watching a documentary) via dedicated terminals on the
premises of such establishments for the purpose of research and
private study. The online consultation of works and other
subject-matter remotely (i.e. when the library user is not on
the premises of the library) requires authorisation and is
generally addressed in agreements between
universities/libraries and publishers. Some argue that the law
rather than agreements should provide for the possibility to,
and the conditions for, granting online accessto collections.

(a)[In particular if you are an institutional user:]Have you
experienced specific problems when trying to negotiate
agreements with rights holders that enable you to provide
remote access, including across borders, to your collections
(or parts thereof) for purposes of research and private study?

(b)[In particular if you are an end user/consumer:]Have you
experienced specific problems when trying to consult, including
across borders, works and other subject-matter held in
thecollections of institutions such as universities and
national libraries when you are not on the premises of the
institutions in question?

(c)[In particular if you are aright holder:]Have you negotiated
agreements with institutional users that enable those
institutions to provide remote access, including across
borders, to the works or other subject-matter in their
collections, for purposes of research and private study?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

If there are problems, how would they best be solved?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

If your view is that a legislative solution is needed, what
would be its main elements? Whichactivities of the beneficiary
institutions should be covered and under which conditions?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

If your view is that a different solution is needed, what would
it be?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

E – lending

Traditionally, public libraries have loaned physical copies of
works (i.e. books, sometimes also CDs and DVDs) to their users.
Recent technological developments have made it technically
possible for libraries to provide users with temporary access
to digital content, such as e-books, music or films via
networks. Under the current legal framework, libraries need to
obtain the authorisation of the rights holders to organise such
e-lending activities. In various Member States, publishers and
libraries are currently experimenting with different business
models for the making available of works online, including
direct supply of e-books to libraries by publishers or bundling
by aggregators.

(a)[In particular if you are alibrary:]Have you experienced
specific problems when trying to negotiate agreements to enable
the electronic lending (e-lending), including across borders, of
books or other materials held inyour collection?

(b)[In particular if you are an end user/consumer:]Have you
experienced specific problems when trying to borrow books or
other materials electronically (e-lending), including across
borders, from institutions such as public libraries?

(c)[In particular if you are aright holder:]Have you negotiated
agreements with libraries to enable them to lend books or other
materials electronically, including across borders?

 YES – Please explain with specific examples

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO

 NO OPINION

If there are problems, how would they best be solved?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

The following two questions arerelevant both to this point (n°
3) and the previous one (n° 2).

[In particular if you are an institutional user:]What
differences do you see in the management of physical and online
collections, including providing access to your subscribers?
Whatproblems have you encountered?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

[In particular if you are a right holder:]What difference do you
see between libraries’ traditional activities such as
on-premisesconsultation or public lending and activities such
as off-premises (online, at a distance) consultation and
e-lending? What problems have you encountered?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Massdigitisation

The term “mass digitisation” is normally used to refer to
efforts by institutions such as libraries and archives to
digitise (e.g. scan) the entire content or part of their
collections with an objective to preserve these collections
and, normally, to make them available to the public. Examples
are efforts by libraries to digitise novels form the early part
of the 20thcentury or whole collections of pictures of
historical value. This matter has been partly addressed at the
EU level by the 2011Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) on key
principles on the digitisation and making available of out
of commerce works (i.e. works which are no longer found in the
normal channels of commerce), which is aiming to facilitate mass
digitisation efforts (for books and learned journals) on the
basis of licence agreements between libraries and similar
cultural institutions on the one hand and the collecting
societies representing authors and publishers on the other43

You will find more information about his MoUon the following
website:http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/copyright/out-of-commerce/index_en.htm.

. Provided the required funding is ensured (digitisation
projects are extremely expensive), the result of this MoU
should be that books that are currently to be found only in the
archives of, for instance, libraries will be digitised and made
available online to everyone. The MoU is based on voluntary
licences (granted by Collective Management Organisations on the
basis of the mandates they receive from authors and publishers).
Some Member States may need to enact legislation to ensure the
largest possible effect of such licences (e.g. by establishing
in legislationa presumption of representation of a collecting
society or the recognition of an “extended effect” to the
licences granted)44

France and Germany have already adopted legislation to back the
effects of the MoU.The French act (LOI n° 2012-287 du 1er mars
2012 relative à l'exploitation numérique des livres
indisponibles du xxe siècle) foresees collective management,
unless the author or publisher in question opposes such
management.The German act (Gesetz zur Nutzung verwaister und
vergriffener Werke und einer weiteren Änderung des
Urheberrechtsgesetzes vom 1.Oktober 2013) contains a legal
presumption of representation by a collecting society in
relation to works whose rightholders are not members of the
collecting society.

.

[In particular if you are an institutional user,engaging or
wanting to engage in mass digitisation projects, a right
holder, a collective management organisation:]Would it be
necessary in your country to enact legislation to ensure that
the results of the 2011 MoU(i.e. the agreementsconcluded
between libraries and collecting societies) have a cross-border
effect so that out of commerce works can be accessed across the
EU?

 YES – Please explain why and how it could best be achieved

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO OPINION

Would it be necessary to develop mechanisms, beyond those
already agreed for other types of content (e.g. for audio-
oraudio-visual collections, broadcasters’ archives)?

 YES – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO OPINION

Teaching

Directive 2001/29/EC45

Article 5(3)a of Directive 2001/29.

enables Member States to implement in their national legislation
limitations and exceptions for the purpose of illustration for
non-commercial teaching. Such exceptions would typically allow
a teacher to use parts of or full works to illustrate his
course, e.g. by distributing copies of fragments of a book or
of newspaper articles in the classroom or by showing protected
content on a smart board without having to obtain
authorisationfrom the right holders. The open formulation of
this (optional) provision allows for rather different
implementation at Member States level. The implementation of
the exception differs from Member State to Member State, with
several Member States providing instead a framework for the
licensing of content for certain educational uses. Some argue
that the law should provide for better possibilities for
distance learning and study at home.

(a)[In particular if you are an end user/consumer or
aninstitutional user:]Have you experienced specific problems
when trying to use works or other subject-matter for
illustration for teaching, including across borders?

(b)[In particular if you are a right holder:]Have you
experienced specific problems resulting from the way in which
works or other subject-matter are used for illustration for
teaching, including across borders?

If there are problems, how would they best be solved?

What mechanisms exist in the market place to facilitate the use
ofcontent for illustration for teaching purposes? How
successful are they?

If your view is that a legislative solution is needed, what
would be its main elements? Which activities of the beneficiary
institutions should be covered and under what conditions?

If your view is that a different solution is needed, what would
it be?

IMRO is of the opinion that current EU law and international
treaties provide the necessary flexibility for copyright and
exceptions and limitations thereto. There is currently no need
to introduce any new exception or to make the available
exceptions under the InfoSoc Directive mandatory, since there
is no evidenced need for such a legislative change. Moreover
CMOs provide the necessary solutions through dedicated
licensing for e.g.teaching, educational institutions, research,
etc.

Research

Directive 2001/29/EC46

Article 5(3)a of Directive 2001/29.

enables Member States to choose whether to implement in their
national laws a limitation for the purpose of
non-commercialscientific research. The open formulation of this
(optional) provision allows for rather different implementations
at Member States level.

(a)[In particular if you are an end user/consumer or an
institutional user:]Have you experienced specific problemswhen
trying to use works or other subject matter in the context of
research projects/activities, including across borders?

(b)[In particular if you are a right holder:]Have you
experienced specific problems resulting from the way in which
works orother subject-matter are used in the context of
research projects/activities, including across borders?

If there are problems, how would they best be solved?

What mechanisms exist in the Member States to facilitate the use
of content for research purposes? How successful are they?

IMRO is of the opinion that current EU law and international
treaties provide the necessary flexibility for copyright and
exceptions and limitations thereto. There is currently no need
to introduce any new exception or to make the available
exceptions under the InfoSoc Directive mandatory, since there
is no evidenced need for such a legislative change. Moreover
CMOs provide the necessary solutions through dedicated
licensing for e.g. teaching, educational institutions,
research, etc.

Disabilities

Directive 2001/29/EC47

Article 5 (3)b of Directive 2001/29.

provides for an exception/limitation for the benefit of people
with a disability. The open formulation of this (optional)
provision allows for rather different implementations at Member
States level. At EU and international level projects have been
launched to increase the accessibility of works and other
subject-matter for persons with disabilities (notably by
increasing the number of works published in special formats
andfacilitating their distribution across the European Union)48

The European Trusted Intermediaries Network (ETIN) resulting
from a Memorandum of Understanding between representatives of
the right-holder community (publishers, authors, collecting
societies)and interested parties such as associations for blind
and dyslexic persons
(http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/copyright/initiatives/access/index_en.htm)
and the Trusted Intermediary Global Accessible Resources (TIGAR)
project in WIPO (http://www.visionip.org/portal/en/).

.

The Marrakesh Treaty49

Marrakesh Treaty to Facilitate Access to Published Works
byVisually Impaired Persons and Persons with Print
Disabilities, Marrakesh, June 17 to 28 2013.

has been adopted to facilitate access to published works for
persons who are blind, visually impaired, or otherwise print
disabled. The Treaty creates a mandatory exception to copyright
that allows organisations for the blind to produce, distribute
and make available accessible format copies to visually
impaired persons without the authorisation of the rightholders.
The EU and its Member States have started work to sign and
ratify the Treaty. This may require the adoption of certain
provisions at EU level (e.g. to ensure the possibility to
exchange accessible format copies across borders).

(a)[In particular if you are a person with a disability or an
organisationrepresenting persons with disabilities:]Have you
experienced problems with accessibility to content, including
across borders, arising from Member States’ implementation of
this exception?

(b)[In particular if you are an organisation providing
servicesfor persons with disabilities:]Have you experienced
problems when distributing/communicating works published in
special formats across the EU?

(c)[In particular if you are a right holder:]Have you
experienced specific problems resulting from theapplication of
limitations or exceptions allowing for the
distribution/communication of works published in special
formats, including across borders?

 YES – Please explain by giving examples

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO

 NO OPINION

If there are problems, what could be done to improve
accessibility?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

What mechanisms exist in the marketplace to facilitate
accessibility to content? How successful are they?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Text and data mining

Text and data mining/content mining/data analytics50

For the purpose ofthe present document, the term “text and data
mining” will be used.

are different terms used to describe increasingly important
techniques used in particular by researchers for the
exploration of vast amounts of existing texts and data (e.g.,
journals, web sites, databases etc.). Through the use of
software or other automated processes, an analysis is made of
relevant texts and data in order to obtain new insights,
patterns and trends.

The texts and data used for mining are either freely accessible
on the internet or accessible through subscriptions to e.g.
journals and periodicals that give access to the databases of
publishers. A copy is made of the relevant texts and data (e.g.
on browser cache memories or in computers RAM memories or onto
the hard disk of a computer), prior to the actual analysis.
Normally, it is considered that to mine protected works or
other subject matter, it is necessary to obtain authorisation
from the right holders for the making of such copies unless
such authorisation can beimplied (e.g. content accessible to
general public without restrictions on the internet, open
access).

Some argue that the copies required for text and data mining are
covered by the exception for temporary copies in Article 5.1 of
Directive 2001/29/EC. Others consider that text and data mining
activities should not even be seen as covered by copyright. None
of this is clear, in particular since text and data mining does
not consist only of a single method, but can be undertaken in
several different ways.Important questions also remain as to
whether the main problems arising in relation to this issue go
beyond copyright (i.e. beyond the necessity or not to obtain
the authorisation to use content) and relate rather to the need
to obtain “access” to content(i.e. being able to use e.g.
commercial databases).

A specific Working Group was set up on this issue in the
framework of the "Licences for Europe" stakeholder dialogue. No
consensus was reached among participating stakeholders on either
the problems to be addressed or the results. At the same time,
practical solutions to facilitate text and data mining of
subscription-based scientific content were presented by
publishers as an outcome of “Licences for Europe”51

See the document “Licences for Europe – tenpledges to bring more
content
online”:http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/copyright/docs/licences-for-europe/131113_ten-pledges_en.pdf.

. In the context of these discussions,other stakeholders argued
that no additional licences should be required to mine material
to which access has been provided through a subscription
agreement and considered that a specific exception for text and
data mining should be introduced, possibly on the basis of
a distinction between commercial and non-commercial.

(a)[In particular if you are an end user/consumer or an
institutional user:]Have you experienced obstacles, linked to
copyright, when trying to usetext or data mining methods,
including across borders?

(b)[In particular if you are a service provider:]Have you
experienced obstacles, linked to copyright, when providing
services based on text or data mining methods, including across
borders?

(c)[In particular if you are a right holder:]Have you
experienced specific problems resulting from the use of text
and data mining in relation to copyright protected content,
including across borders?

 NO

In our view, text and data mining constitutes use in copyright
terms. However this not an InfoSoc Directive related issue.
Such issue is to be considered under the Database Directive.
Depending on the technology chosen by the miner or his/her
technical contributor, the behaviour is either reproduction or
fallswithin the scope of the general rule on the exploitation
of works that is subject to the authorization of the right
holder. In the case of databases, Article 7 (5) of the Database
Directive is extremely relevant in this respect. (The repeated
and systematic extraction and/or re-utilization of
insubstantial parts of the contents of the database implying
acts which conflict with a normal exploitation of that database
or which unreasonably prejudice the legitimate interests of the
maker of the database shallnot be permitted.)

There is not any exception (free use) in this regard.
Presumably, such a broad exception that would permit data and
text mining in general would conflict with the Member States’
international obligations.

If there are problems, howwould they best be solved?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

If your view is that a legislative solution is needed, what
would be its main elements? Which activities should be covered
and underwhat conditions?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

If your view is that a different solution is needed, what would
it be?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Are there other issues, unrelated to copyright, that constitute
barriers to the use of text or data mining methods?

[Open question] ……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

User-generated content

Technological and service developments mean that citizens can
copy, use and distribute content at little to no financial
cost. As a consequence, new types of online activities are
developing rapidly, including the making of
so-called“user-generated content”. While users can create
totally original content, they can also take one or several
pre-existing works, change something in the work(s), and upload
the result on the Internet e.g. to platforms and blogs52

A typical example couldbe the “kitchen” or “wedding” video
(adding one's own video to a pre-existing sound recording), or
adding one's own text to a pre-existing photograph. Other
examples are “mash-ups” (blending two sound recordings), and
reproducing parts of journalistic work(report, review etc.) in
a blog.

. User-generated content (UGC) can thus cover the modification
of pre-existing works even if the newly-generated/"uploaded"
work does not necessarily require a creative effort and results
from merely adding, subtracting orassociating some pre-existing
content with other pre-existing content. This kind of activity
is not “new” as such. However, the development of social
networking and social media sites that enable users to share
content widely has vastly changed the scale of such activities
and increased the potential economic impact for those holding
rights in the pre-existing works. Re-use is no longer the
preserve of a technically and artistically adept elite. With
the possibilities offered by the new technologies, re-useis
open to all, at no cost. This in turn raises questions with
regard to fundamental rights such the freedom of expression and
the right to property.

A specific Working Group was set up on this issue in the
framework of the "Licences for Europe" stakeholder dialogue. No
consensus was reached among participating stakeholders on either
the problems to be addressed or the results or even the
definition of UGC. Nevertheless, a wide range of views were
presented as to the best way to respond to this phenomenon.One
view was to say that a new exception is needed to cover UGC, in
particular non-commercial activities by individuals such as
combining existing musical works with videos, sequences of
photos, etc. Another view was that no legislative change is
needed:UGC is flourishing, and licensing schemes are
increasingly available (licence schemes concluded between
rightholders and platforms as well as micro-licences concluded
between rightholders and the users generating the content. In
any event, practical solutions to ease user-generated content
and facilitate micro-licensing for small users were pledged by
rightholders across different sectors as a result of the
“Licences for Europe” discussions53

See the document “Licences for Europe – ten pledges to bring
more content
online”:http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/copyright/docs/licences-for-europe/131113_ten-pledges_en.pdf.

.

(a)[In particular ifyou are an end user/consumer:]Have you
experienced problems when trying to use pre-existing works or
other subject matter to disseminate new content on the
Internet, including across borders?

(b)[In particular if you are a service provider:]Have you
experienced problems when users publish/disseminate new content
based on the pre-existing works or other subject-matter through
your service, including across borders?

(c)[In particular if you are a right holder:]Have you
experienced problems resulting from the way the users are using
pre-existing works or other subject-matter to disseminate new
content on the Internet, including across borders?

YES– Please explain by giving examples

The creation and communication of new works using pre-existing
works byconsumers is growing and made possible by technology.
Licensing solutions exist to license the platforms that
monetise the distribution and dissemination of these works.
Additional licensing solutions may be desirable to authorise
the creation of works,without impacting the moral rights of
authors, but there is no case for an exception and no evidence
of a chilling effect of the current framework.

IMRO participated in Working group 2 of the Licences for Europe
discussion. We note there was no agreement on what constituted
user-generated content. Therefore, there needs first to be an
agreed definition of the term, in order to capture the wide
variety of activities and uses. For example it can include: (i)
content entirely created by users, (ii) content uploaded by
users but entirely created by someone else, (iii) content that
uses part of an existing work but juxtaposes it with other
content and (iv) content that is based on an existing work but
does not use any of it wholesale. There are likely to
bedifferent problems, challenges and solutions in each of these
areas, so clearly defined uses are essential in forthcoming
discussion on this issue.

However, there are also a number of common problems in the
operation of the current operation of the market, which must be
considered.

Users share and play with pre-existing works because they value
them and manufacturers of devices and software, ISPs and UGC
websites are building sustainable and highly profitable
business models on the exchange of UGC. A licensing solution is
therefore an essential component of this market.

UGC involves the reproduction, communication and adaptation of
pre-existing works. Licensing pre-existing works for new
purposes is a key, normal part of exploitation for
rightholders: books are made into films, music is used for
advertising, cartoons are made into soft toys. UGC may also
affect moral rights when the identity of the original author is
lost or there is derogatory treatment of a work. We note that it
is important that rightholders retain the right not to license
UGC.

IMRO has licensed the communication and distribution activities
of some UGC websites and other European CMOs have reached
similar agreements in the last year. However, there are
difficulties in licensing somesites at all, or some sites for
full value, because they rely on the Hosting Defence of the
E-Commerce Directive to reduce their liability for copyright.
The e commerce Directive should be assessed to ensure that it
does not create barriers to licensingof sites that make money
from copyright works. This difficulty in licensing not only
negatively impacts rightholders’ livelihoods but has a negative
consumer impact.

It would be in no-one’s interests if the internet became a
lawless ‘free for all’ in which social responsibility and
citizenship were absent.

We therefore call for the Commission to support creators in
developing fair and efficient licensing models that support the
great explosion of re-use of copyright content on the
internetand to improveeducation and awareness when consumers
are using pre-existing works and creation new works.

(a)[In particular if you are an end user/consumer or a right
holder:]Have you experienced problems when trying to ensure
that the work you have created (on thebasis of pre-existing
works) is properly identified for online use? Are proprietary
systems sufficient in this context?

(b)[In particular if you are a service provider:]Do you provide
possibilities for users that are publishing/disseminating the
works they have created (on the basis of pre-existing works)
through your service to properly identify these works for
online use?

(a)[In particular if you are an end user/consumer or a right
holder):]Have you experienced problems when trying to be
remuneratedfor the use of the work you have created (on the
basis of pre-existing works)?

(b)[In particular if you are a service provider:]Do you provide
remuneration schemes for users publishing/disseminating the
works they have created (on the basis of pre-existing works)
through your service?

If there are problems, how would they best be solved?

Our response to Q58(c) notes certain difficulties in ensuring
that UGC services are suitably licensed for user content. We
therefore suggest

(i)  Improved notice-and-takedown procedures, so that an author
can object to adapted content if it is considered derogatory
and exercise their moral rights.

(ii) a review of the hosting provisions of the ecommerce
directive.

If your view is that a legislative solution is needed,what would
be its main elements? Which activities should be covered and
under what conditions?

If your view is that a different solution is needed, what would
it be?

1)  In the absence of any established definition of
‘user-generated content’, it isextremely difficult, if not
impossible, to assess if there are any difficulties and, if
there are, their scope and any possible solution. The lack of a
common definition was probably the only common understanding in
the UGC Working Group of the Licences for Europe initiative.

2)  Platforms that distribute UGC are major digital content
services and are very fast developing with an evolving end-user
interaction with copyright works.

3)  Therefore as a principle IMRO stresses that:

a/ CMOs wish to enable UGCplatforms to continue their activity
and encourage the creativity of the public but this requires
that the platforms accept their liability as digital
serviceproviders and license the relevant rights involved for
full value for operating such services and do not try to avoid
their liability by invoking the safe harbour provisions of the
E-Commerce Directive,

b/ There is no clear definition of UGC on which to evaluate a
clear policy line and European policy makers should refrain
from dealing with issues until they have been defined,

c/ There is no evidence - legal, economic or social - which
indicates that the copyright framework creates a
chilling-effect that might restrict people’s exercise of
freedom of speech or participation to public debate,

d/ The fact that members of the public engage with protected
works with non-commercial purposes, is not relevant to justify
an exception for UGC, since the platforms offering UGC services
are clearly commercial. In fact those platforms are also used
for commercial purposes and what a consumer might see as
non-commercial can still have economic impact on the author.
Furthermore such criterion does not take into account the
evolving nature of exploitation of a protected work: a work
created for non-commercial purposes may very quickly have a
great success and tip into the commercial sphere. Moreover
being commercial or not is not a relevant criterion in
copyright law, since the use of exclusive rights requires an
authorisation anyway.

4)  For all the above reasons,IMRO believes that there is no
need for legislation and, even if it were considered, an UGC
exception would be unjustified and contrary to the objectives
sought by a sound European Digital Agenda.

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Private copyingand reprography

Directive 2001/29/EC enables Member States to implement in their
national legislation exceptions or limitations to the
reproduction right for copies made for private use and
photocopying54

Article 5. 2)(a) and (b) of Directive 2001/29.

. Levies are charges imposed at national level on goods
typically used for such purposes (blank media, recording
equipment, photocopying machines, mobile listening devices such
as mp3/mp4 players, computers, etc.) with a view to compensating
rightholders for the harm they suffer when copies are made
without their authorisation by certain categories of persons
(i.e. natural persons making copies for their private use) or
through use of certain technique (i.e. reprography). In that
context, levies are important for rightholders.

With the constant developments in digital technology, the
question arises as to whether the copying of files by
consumers/end-users who have purchased content online - e.g.
when a person has bought an MP3 file and goes on to store
multiplecopies of that file (in her computer, her tablet and
her mobile phone) - also triggers, or should trigger, the
application of private copying levies. It is argued that, in
some cases, these levies may indeed be claimed by rightholders
whether or not the licence fee paid by the service provider
already covers copies made by the end user. This approach could
potentially lead to instances of double payments whereby levies
could be claimed on top of service providers’ licence fees55

Communication "Unleashingthe Potential of Cloud Computing in
Europe", COM(2012) 529 final.

56

These issues were addressed in the recommendations of Mr António
Vitorino resulting from the mediation on private copying and
reprography levies. You can consult these recommendations onthe
following
website:http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/copyright/docs/levy_reform/130131_levies-vitorino-recommendations_en.pdf.

.

There is also an on-going discussion as to the application or
not of levies to certain types of cloud-based services such as
personal lockers or personal video recorders.

In your view, is there a need to clarify at the EU level the
scope andapplication of the private copying and reprography
exceptions57

Art. 5.2(a) and 5.2(b) of Directive 2001/29/EC.

in the digital environment?

 NO

There are numerous EUCJ decisions interpreting the scope of the
exception and the compensation system; thereis no need for
further legislative clarification. There is a need for
consistent implementation of the exception.

The implementation of a private compensation exception is a
benefit to consumers who are able freely to make the copies of
copyright workswithout breaking the law, and to creators who
benefit from the compensation paid for those private copies.
There is cross-border distortion when countries such as the
Republic of Ireland choose not to implement the exception (thus
penalising consumers inthe Republic of Ireland) or choose to
implement the exception without compensation (thus penalising
creators across the EU). A more consistent interpretation,
implementation, and provision of ‘fair compensation’ across the
EU would minimise any such distortions and reduce confusion for
consumers.

Should digital copies made by end users for private purposes in
the context of a service that has been licensed by
rightholders, and where the harm to the rightholder is minimal,
be subject to private copying levies?58

This issue was also addressed in the recommendations of Mr
Antonio Vitorino resulting from the mediation on private
copying and reprography levies

 NO

The response will depend on the specific national rules. The
question is whether the rightsholder is able to license the
subsequent copies made by consumers from digital copies or
whether those copies are subject to the exception and to the
levy scheme, in which case there is no opportunity to contract
with the service for those copies.

How wouldchanges in levies with respect to the application to
online services (e.g. services based on cloud computing
allowing, for instance, users to have copies on different
devices) impact the development and functioning of new business
models on the one handand rightholders’ revenue on the other?

In a modern copyright market the remuneration for rightsholders
is achieved either through licensing or compensation via
levies, and these two are compatible and already co-exist in
territories where there is aprivate copy exception with
compensation.

Online services, whether download, streaming or storage
services, all of which may use the cloud as part of their
operational system, provide a service to consumers based on use
of copyright works and they therefore require a licence. The
scope of licences, where exceptions do not apply, already
includes the ability to make copies and to put copies on
different devices.

Would you see an added value in making levies visible on the
invoices for products subjectto levies?59

This issue was also addressed in the recommendations of Mr
Antonio Vitorino resulting from the mediation on private
copying and reprography levies.

 YES – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO OPINION

Diverging national systems levy different products and apply
different tariffs. This results in obstacles to the free
circulation of goodsand services in the Single Market. At the
same time, many Member States continue to allow the
indiscriminate application of private copying levies to all
transactions irrespective of the person to whom the product
subject to a levy is sold (e.g. private person or business). In
that context, not all Member States have ex ante exemption
and/or ex post reimbursement schemes which could remedy these
situations and reduce the number of undue payments60

This issue was also addressed in the recommendations of
MrAntonio Vitorino resulting from the mediation on private
copying and reprography levies.

.

Have you experienced a situation where a cross-border
transaction resulted in undue levy payments, or duplicate
payments of the same levy, or other obstacles to the free
movement of goods or services?

What percentage of products subject to a levy is sold to persons
other than natural persons for purposes clearly unrelated to
private copying? Do any of those transactions result in undue
payments? Please explain indetail the example you provide (type
of products, type of transaction, stakeholders, etc.).

Where such undue payments arise, what percentage of trade do
they affect? To what extent could a priori exemptions and/or ex
post reimbursement schemes existing in some Member States help
to remedy the situation?

If you have identified specific problems with the current
functioning of the levy system, how would these problems best
be solved?

We refer in answer to Q67-71 to the GESAC response.

Fair remunerationof authors and performers

The EU copyright acquis recognises for authors and performers a
number of exclusive rights and, in the case of performers whose
performances are fixed in phonograms, remuneration rights. There
are few provisions in the EU copyright law governing
thetransferof rights from authors or performers to producers61

See e.g. Directive 92/100/EEC, Art.2(4)-(7).

or determining who the owner of the rights is when the work or
other subject matter is created in the context of an employment
contract62

See e.g. Art. 2.3. of Directive 2009/24/EC, Art. 4 of Directive
96/9/EC.

. This is an area that has been traditionally left for Member
States to regulate and there are significant differences in
regulatory approaches. Substantial differences alsoexist
between different sectors of the creative industries.

Concerns continue to be raised that authors and performers are
not adequately remunerated, in particular but not solely, as
regards online exploitation. Many consider that the economic
benefit of new forms of exploitation is not being fairly shared
along the whole value chain. Another commonly raised issue
concerns contractual practices, negotiation mechanisms,
presumptions of transfer of rights, buy-out clauses and the
lack of possibility to terminate contracts. Some stakeholders
are of the opinion that rules at national level do not suffice
to improve their situation and that action at EU level is
necessary.

[In particular if you are an author/performer:] What is the best
mechanism (orcombination of mechanisms) to ensure that you
receive an adequate remuneration for the exploitation of your
works and performances?

The level of remuneration for authors and performers from
copyright should have been the first question on the
questionnaire. The copyright framework already contributes
positively to jobs and growth in the EU but it is also
pertinent to investigate whether the individual authors,
composers and creators are rewarded adequately for the use of
their work. The copyright framework must support a sustainable
ecosystem for creation of and investment in new works and in
supporting services that supply and distribute new services to
consumers.

IMRO will not comment on the issues of contracts but is aware of
Commission work in this area in support of composers, authors
and performers.

Is there a need to act at the EU level (for instance to prohibit
certain clauses in contracts)?

If you consider that the current rules are not effective, what
would you suggest to address theshortcomings you identify?

Whether for offline or online exploitations, collective
management is the best solution to strike a balance between
ease of rights clearance, legal certainty and adequate
remuneration for authors and composers.

Respect for rights

Directive 2004/48/EE63

Directive 2004/48/EC of the European Parliament and of the
Council of 29 April 2004 on the enforcement of intellectual
property rights.

provides for a harmonised framework for the civil enforcement of
intellectual property rights, including copyright and related
rights. The Commission has consulted broadly on this text64

You will find more information on the following
website:http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/iprenforcement/directive/index_en.htm

. Concerns have been raised as to whether some of its provisions
are still fit to ensure a proper respect for copyright in the
digital age. On the one hand, the current measures seem to be
insufficient to deal with the new challenges brought by the
dissemination of digital content on the internet; on the other
hand, there are concerns about the current balance between
enforcement of copyright and the protection of fundamental
rights, in particular the right for a private life and data
protection. While it cannot be contested that enforcement
measures should always be available in case of infringement of
copyright, measures could be proposed to strengthen respect for
copyright when the infringed content is used for a commercial
purpose65

For example when the infringing content is offered on a website
which gets advertising revenues that depend on the volume of
traffic.

. One means to do this could be to clarify the role of
intermediaries in the IPinfrastructure66

This clarification should not affect the liability regime of
intermediary service providers established by Directive
2000/31/EC on electronic commerce, which will remain unchanged.

. At the same time, there could be clarification of the
safeguards for respect of private life and data protection for
private users.

Should the civil enforcement system in the EU be rendered more
efficient for infringements of copyright committed with a
commercial purpose?

YES

The civil enforcement systemin the EU should be made more
efficient so as to effectively address and deter services that
offering infringing material to their users, whether funded by
subscription, donation or advertising. These types of services
should not be entitled to the immunity from liability offered
by the Article 14 hosting exception of the E-Commerce
Directive. The Directive was intended to award immunity to
particular activities carried out by neutral internet
intermediaries and recital 42 of the Directive refers to a
protected service as being “merely technical, automatic and
passive.

The current system of notice and take down puts all the resource
and financial burdens on rightsholders while services have no
incentive to assist in detection of illegal content, even
through the technological means are available.

There are technological measures available for service providers
to allow them to easily and effectively identify files and
infringements, based on prior notifications given to them by
rights holders. Many services now employ such measures, but
unfortunately most providers still do not adopt this technology
or take these steps.

The system of notice and takedown, which is ineffective to
address the problem of illegal content appearing online.
Illegal content spreads very rapidly and popular musical works
will generally spread across numerous different online
platforms and services within a matter of minutes. An enforcing
rights holder must find as many copies of the work as possible
and take action in relationto each of those in order to have
any positive impact. Even then, it is highly unlikely to fully
solve the problem of the work’s availability online. In
addition tothis, once files have been removed, they can quickly
re-appear: either being re-uploadedby the same internet user, or
by a different user of the same online service, or alternatively
by a user of an entirely different online service or platform.

There must be a limit on the number of times an intermediary can
be notified of infringing contentwhilst still relying on the
safe harbour in the Article 14 hosting exemption. Once a
service reaches the limit, there should be a presumption that
the intermediary is no longer “merely technical, automatic and
passive” and therefore unable to rely on thehosting exemption.
In these circumstances, the onus would pass from the rights
holder to the intermediary, to monitor and remove
infringements.

We believe that notice and action working practices would
greatly benefit if the Commission were to issue non-binding
guidelines in relation to the functioning of procedures and the
interpretation of Article 14. In our view, the guidelines should
cover:

1.  clarification that the hosting exemption is only available
to particular activities which are merelytechnical, automatic
and passive, where carried out by neutral online services, and
not to platforms which are designed or optimised to make
available or facilitate the making available of illegal
content, such as material which infringes copyright;

2.  clarification that notice and takedown means “notice and
stay down” and that service providers are required to remove
not only an example URL but all instances of the specific
infringement or illegal content once they are notified and/or
become aware;

3.  best-practices for hosting service providers’ procedures
that deal with illegal content, including (a) a recommendation
that service providers’ abuse policies and procedures should be
easily found, clearly stated, apparent and generally consistent,
(b) that online takedown tools for speedy removal are made
available and easy to find and use; (c) a recommendation that
action in response to notices should be taken in a matter of
hours, not days; (d) a recommendation that communications be
sent by service providers to notice providers, informing them
when action has been taken; and (e) a system of accreditation
for reputable notice providers, who would be given priority
access to the service provider’s platform in order to search
for, identify and report illegal content, and for whom
expedited action is taken in response to notices. Accreditation
should be lost or suspended in cases where notice providers are
found to have abused those privileges.

It is not just infringements for commercial purposes that
require effective enforcement measures. Most infringements have
some impact on rights holders and a package of proportionate
measures are required in order to deal with the spectrum of
wrongdoing.

In particular, is the current legal framework clearenough to
allow for sufficient involvement of intermediaries (such as
Internet service providers, advertising brokers, payment
service providers, domain name registrars, etc.) in inhibiting
online copyright infringements with a commercial purpose? If
not,what measures would be useful to foster the cooperation of
intermediaries?

[Open question]

We have experience in enforcing the rights of our members. We
believe that the legal framework which establishes the
liability of intermediaries has created the wrong balance. It
creates incentives for intermediaries to be entirely passive so
as to avoid liability forlicensing. They have no incentive to
inform their customers and consumers or to help with awareness
and education of consumers. The notice and takedown system is
placing a burden on rightsholders but is not operating to its
full benefit. The responsibility of other intermediaries, such
as advertising or payment services, must be more clearly
defined, perhaps in the form of a joint agreement or MOU to
ensure they take active role in preventing their services being
used to support unauthorised and illegal businesses.

Does the current civil enforcement framework ensure that the
right balance is achieved between the right to have one’s
copyrightrespected and other rights such as the protection of
private life and protection of personal data?

 YES – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO OPINION

A single EU Copyright Title

The idea of establishing a unified EU Copyright Title has been
present in the copyright debate for quite some time now,
although views as to the merits and the feasibilityof such an
objective are divided. A unified EU Copyright Title would
totally harmonise the area of copyright law in the EU and
replace national laws. There would then be a single EU title
instead of a bundle of national rights. Some see this as the
only manner in which a truly Single Market for content
protected by copyright can be ensured, while others believe
that the same objective can better be achieved by establishing
a higher level of harmonisation while allowing for a certain
degree of flexibility and specificity in Member States’ legal
systems.

Should the EU pursue the establishment of a single EU Copyright
Title, as a means of establishing a consistent framework for
rights and exceptions to copyright across the EU, as well as a
single framework for enforcement?

Should this be the next step in the development of copyright in
the EU? Does the current level of difference among the Member
State legislation mean that this is a longer term project?

IMRO is of the opinion that there is no need forthe complete
harmonisation of copyright in the EU by means of a
comprehensive copyright code because, basically, the existing
EU legislative acts already ensure a high standard of copyright
protection.

Other issues

The above questionnaire aims to providea comprehensive
consultation on the most important matters relating to the
current EU legal framework for copyright. Should any important
matters have been omitted, we would appreciate if you could
bring them to our attention, so they can be properly addressed
in the future.

Are there any other important matters related to the EU legal
framework for copyright? Please explain and indicate how such
matters should be addressed.

A secure copyright regime is essential to Europe’s economic
stability, future growth, and the cultural diversity of the EU.
This is because it ensures that creators are paid for the use of
their works and incentivises them to free up access to works,
which in turn stimulates innovation, investment and ultimately
the creation of new works.

Any programme which seeks to ensure a copyright framework for
digital markets must be based on two primary objectives. First,
to facilitate a rights regime which means consumers can legally
access content, when and how they want it. Secondly,
andimportantly, ensure that rightsholders are fairly
remunerated in a digital market when their works are used and
monetised by others providers.

In respect of the first, the current European copyright
framework, because it is technology and platform neutral, has
proven resilient to the development of digital technology and
services. The predictable and stable environment over the last
decade has supported a multitude of new broadcasting, online
and consumer services which were almost unimaginable whenthe
Directive was introduced in 2001. Therefore, while there is a
case for simplification of licensing, through market-led
solutions support by EU and domestic Governments, the copyright
framework as a whole has proved it is not a barrier to the
growth of service providers or to the European single digital
market.

However, we believe there remain significant questions whether
the current framework is creating sufficient value for
rightsholders rights. Real term earnings for music creators in
the Republic of Ireland, taking account of inflation, are in
decline. While this has much to do with the falling value of
physical sales, which is not being replaced by digital, it is
also a factor of a digital ecosystem which allows providers and
intermediaries tomonetise rights protected works without
remunerating rightsholders. If the EU is to continue to enjoys
the benefits, in jobs and economic growth, of a world leading
cultural sector this must be addressed.

