
1.

No

2.

No

3.

Authors generally have “exclusive rights” without borders, so they can
licence the exploitation of the work without borders as well. But in the
EU’s audiovisual sector authors usually assign their rights for the whole
world to the producer. Their works are exploited globally by the producer
who can license the exploitation rights for various modes of exploitation
and territories. Audiovisual authors are neither able to control the
distribution of their works, nor the remuneration for the exploitation of
their works. The European film and audiovisual sector are fragmented into
several markets based on languages and types of exploitation of the works.
Most audiovisual (online) media services, target specific markets. These
services do not need and therefore do not request multi-territorial
licences.
Because there is no harmonization of collective rights management in the
audiovisual sector, in particular for authors’ rights, only a few
audiovisual authors’ CMOs (e.g. in Belgium, France, Italy, Spain and
Switzerland) are able to clear online rights for their repertoire. In other
countries, such as Austria, online rights for audiovisual works are
individually managed (by the producers).
Of course audiovisual authors want their works to be widely accessible on
online services. They are interested in developing a model for the
collection and distribution of audiovisual authors’ remuneration for the
online exploitation of their works. One major obstacle is that only a few
audiovisual authors’ CMOs are entitled to clear the online rights for their
repertoire. This reduces the interest of service providers for such a multi-
territorial licence. This lack of harmonisation is an obstacle to pan-
European online rights clearance for European audiovisual works. The
Commission is also unclear about the cooperation possibilities between CMOs
and generally prefers to encourage competition. There is also no
harmonisation of the tax treatment of cross-border royalty payments between
Member States. If CMOs from different Member States develop a common
licensing platform, they expose their members to an additional layer of
withholding tax. These problems should be urgently solved by the
Commission.

4.

The European legislator should provide audiovisual authors with a
harmonised guarantee of remuneration for the online exploitation of their
works that can be exercised by their CMOs. This should be implemented by an
unwaivable and inalienable right to remuneration enforced through a scheme
where CMOs are entrusted to collect the remuneration at the level of the
final distributors.
In the audiovisual sector, after the initial transfer of the authors’
making available right to the producer, this right is usually split
territorially and ￼transferred to many different operators. The contractual
chain back to authors is very long and easily broken if one element of the
chain experience difficulties (e.g. an intermediary going out of business)
so that the authors rarely receive any remuneration based on the
exploitation of the work. Collective management should therefore guarantee
actual remuneration for the online exploitation of audiovisual works for
the authors, and be helpful to users who know where to get the licences
from.

5.

Yes

“Territorial restrictions” are more often a “cultural” than a “legal”
problem. If you e.g. think about traditional dialect singers and musicians,
one can hardly imagine a common internal market because of cultural and/or
linguistic differences and interests within the various groups of
consumers. Of course audiovisual authors want their works to be accessible
all over Europe as long as all required authorisations have been regularly
acquired from the producers. In fact there is no distributor in Europe that
is able to exploit audiovisual works in all countries for all modes of
exploitation. Even audiovisual media services, who could technically
exploit audiovisual works on a worldwide basis, target specific markets and
actively promote their catalogue only in a limited number of languages.
Therefore one can doubt the actual need of these services to acquire pan-
European rights if they do not exercise them. Of course licences should
match the exploitation prospects.

6.

No Opinion


7.

No

There is no need for legislative changes to increase the cross-border
availability of content services in the internal market, as the current
legal copyright framework is no obstacle to achieve that goal. The
Commission should consider legal initiatives to ensure a system of higher
protection for rightholders and fair remuneration for the usage of their
works. Also the liability provisions of the E-Commerce Directive for
Internet providers should possibly be revised by the Commission.
Beyond that, the European legislator should ensure that audiovisual authors
are remunerated for the online distribution of their works, independently
of the country of production and exploitation. With such a level playing
field, authors’ collective management organisations, entrusted to manage
the making available remuneration of audiovisual authors could develop “one-
stop-shops” to offer a single licence point to online operators. This will,
in turn, make it easier for them to pay the remuneration due to the
European audiovisual authors of the works in their catalogue. This must be
a priority for the Commission to ensure that audiovisual authors are
remunerated for the on-demand exploitation of their works whatever the
country of exploitation.

8.

No

Online audiovisual media services should work more with rightholders at the
origin of the production and distribution of works in order to secure
online exploitation rights for cross-border services.

9.

No

10.

Yes

The “reproduction right” and the “making available right” are two different
exclusive rights provided by international, European and national copyright
laws and their separate application has never created any problems from a
practical point of view. Usually rightholders cooperate with each other to
provide services with the relevant rights. Above that in the audiovisual
sector both rights are usually managed by the same entities.
In the offline-world in broadcasting (broadcasting rights, mechanical
rights for a broadcast) the practice of licensing two rights for one
exploitation exists for a long time and has not caused any problems so far.
With regard to the “online-rights” for online exploitations, I have not
experienced any difficulties in the licensing practice either.

11.

I do not want to prevent the normal utilisation of the Internet, which is
based on a wide array of hyperlinks. But of course it has to be
considered, that there are many (technically) different ways of linking. A
normal hyperlink (i.e. a mere digital reference to content which can
be found elsewhere on the internet) has to be treated differently than e.g.
a deep, framed or embedded link. A hyperlink as such of course
should not need the authorisation of the rightholder, but for “embedded” or
“framed” links within websites, authorisation is needed,
especially if the linking generates commercial gain. “Deep-linking” on the
other hand might be considered as an act of “communication to
the public” in the sense of the Info- Soc Directive.

12.

No

The act of “simple viewing” should never need the authorisation of the
rightholder, independently from the medium or technology that provides for
the content or enables its viewing. “Temporary reproductions” are covered
under a mandatory copyright exception of the Info-Soc Directive (Art 5/1).
However, when the reproduction comes from an obviously illegal platform,
the temporary reproduction - but not the viewing itself - should be
prohibited (as per the ruling in the kino.to case in Germany where the
notorious German streaming portal site offering links to illegal films and
TV series was shut down and the people behind the portal prosecuted).

13.

No Opinion


14.

Re-sale of protected works such as audiovisual works online would result in
new copies, and as far as “forward and delete” technology (which erases the
first copy from the seller’s hard drive) isn’t applied, which still is the
regular case, each reproduction has to be authorised by the rightholders.
Providing a legal framework enabling the resale of previously purchased
digital content would actually raise more problems than it solves. However,
a number of issues would have to be carefully considered. For example,
whether rightholders would be ensured a fair proportion from the proceeds
from re-sales, whether it would be feasible to obtain rightholders’
authorisation for each act of resale, whether the first sale doctrine
should apply in the digital context to content other than software, the
meaning of a “copy” for copyright purposes (i.e. if the new copy made on
the reseller platform amounts to an infringement of the reproduction
right), etc.
Digital files can be reproduced much easier than tangible data carriers and
without the loss of quality. Therefore, there is a high risk that the
resale of digital files, such as mp4/AV-files of audiovisual works, would
lead to massive misuse. Numerous unauthorized digital copies could be sold
as alleged originals. How is the purchaser to know, if he bought the
original or only a copy of the digital file? Since the quality of the
digital copy is identical with the quality of the original, the resale of
declared copies of digital files within a declared “2nd hand service”, in
which copies naturally would be sold for a cheaper price, would result in
an inexorable drop of the price for the originals. Not only would cause
this immense financial harm for film-producers and -authors, but also for
online service providers.

15.

No

16.

CMOs already provide such a “registration system” for the identification
and licensing of works in various ways. They already administer lots of
information about rightholders, their works and the usage of works on a
national, European and international level and grant relating licenses
(which is basically true for musical societies, as in fact most of the
audiovisual societies in Europe do not administer “primary exploitation
rights”, as indicated before).
So there is in fact no need to develop any parallel systems, which would
indeed be counterproductive. Above that, it seems unclear, whether such a
registration system would be voluntary or obligatory, public or private and
if it would be for the identification of rightholders only or otherwise
what rights it would grant. That means it is unclear whether it should be a
simple register which keeps a record of concluded contracts, or if it is
supposed to grant copyright protection.

17.

I am against any system that would run against the mandatory “formality
prohibition” of the Berne Convention.
In any way setting up such a registration system would be extremely costly,
time consuming and would likely never be reliable since it would constantly
have to be kept up-to-date. So it probably would be much more efficient to
link all the individual databases that already exist and are constantly
being developed (not only but also) within the audiovisual sector.
CMOs already provide such a “registration system” for the identification
and licensing of works in various ways. They already administer lots of
information about rightholders, their works and the usage of works on a
national, European and international level and grant relating licenses
(which is basically true for musical societies, as in fact most of the
audiovisual societies in Europe do not administer “primary exploitation
rights”, as indicated before).
So there is in fact no need to develop any parallel systems, which would
indeed be counterproductive. Above that, it seems unclear, whether such a
registration system would be voluntary or obligatory, public or private and
if it would be for the identification of rightholders only or otherwise
what rights it would grant. That means it is unclear whether it should be a
simple register which keeps a record of concluded contracts, or if it is
supposed to grant copyright protection.

18.

Easy to access, free of charge, transparency, easy to adapt, supplied in a
wide range of flexible technical formats. Incentives must not be connected
to copyright privileges as this would contradict international copyright
law.

19.

In the fields of collective management, i.e. also regarding audiovisual
works, lots of “International Standars” already exist and are constantly
developed.
For example the “International Standard Audiovisual Number” (ISAN) is a
voluntary numbering system and metadata scheme enabling the identification
of any audiovisual work, including films, shorts, documentaries, television
programs and their related versions. ISAN provides a unique,
internationally recognised and permanent reference number for each piece of
audiovisual content registered. ISAN is being used in production and
distribution systems and to drive broadcast transmission systems,
facilitating interoperability and information exchange that contributes to
improving rights management. ISAN is key to content tracking and
monitoring, and has been integrated in several watermarking and
fingerprinting technologies. Collective management of rights relies on
identification systems and databases. ISAN is progressively being
integrated into the databases of audiovisual authors’ CMOs containing
information on the works, their authors and other rights holders.
Audiovisual authors’ CMOs have also developed IDA (International
Documentation on Audiovisual Works), a worldwide audiovisual rights
management system and online database that authors’ CMOs consult to get
accurate information on audiovisual works and rights owners. This global
database manages original productions, versions and adaptations in other
languages and formats. Each work registration contains a minimum set of
information: original titles, foreign titles, subtitles, production
companies, year and country of production, shooting languages, rights
owners, ISAN number, IPI (Interested Party Information), exploitation
purposes and a unique IDA code. The audiovisual authors’ CMOs use IDA to
identify the transmitted audiovisual production and rights-owners, retrieve
and treat the information before distributing the royalties to the
identified sister organisations. The sister organisation itself will
transfer these royalties to their authors. The unique IDA code is used
between CMOs when exchanging information on an audiovisual work. Before
IDA, authors’ CMOs sent requests by e-mail or mail to sister societies,
meaning paperwork and rather long identification processes. IDA facilitates
their identification and the exchange of documentation between CMOs and
accelerates the transfer of payments between CMOs.
Such a database is built for the specific needs of audiovisual authors’
CMOs but uses existing tools such as IPI and ISAN in order to avoid the
duplication of efforts. It represents a significant investment for these
CMOs which will deliver benefits in the long term. IDA is a CISAC tool (the
International Confederation of Societies of Authors and Composers) and is a
part of the “CISAC Professional Rules” and the “Binding Resolutions” for
audiovisual authors’ CMOs, rules that aim to improve transparency and
quality of service for all CISAC members.
The European Union could help in building a portal giving some public
information and visibility to these tools and how they work together.

20.

Yes

I definitely believe that the term of protection should not be changed and
especially not be shortened. This would have negative impacts on the
ability of rightholders to exploit their works during the period of the
exclusivity of their rights. The EU-Directive harmonising the term of
protection of copyright and certain related rights recalled that the Berne
Convention lays down only minimum terms of protection, leaving Contracting
States free to grant longer terms. As certain Member States had exercised
this entitlement, the resulting differences between national laws were
considered as distorting competition in the internal market, which
justified harmonisation to make terms of protection identical throughout
the Community.
The Directive recalls that the minimum term of protection laid down by the
Berne Convention (life of the author and 50 years after his death) was
intended to provide protection for the author and the first two generations
of his descendants and considered that the average lifespan in the
Community had increased, to the point where this term was no longer
sufficient to cover two generations. Therefore, in order to establish a
high level of protection, which at the same time meets the requirements of
the internal market and the need to establish a legal environment conducive
to the harmonious development of literary and artistic creation in the
Community, the Directive harmonised the term of protection for copyright at
70 years after the death of the author. Therefore, apart from
harmonisation, the main reason for the extension of the term of protection
from 50 to 70 years was the extension of the average lifespan in Europe.
I do not see any reason linked to the digital environment that would
question the duration of terms of copyright protection.
Copyright in no way hinders that a work is exploited or used for the
creation of another work. Copyright merely provides the rightholder with an
adequate remuneration for the usage of his/her work. The shortening of the
copyright term would harm not only the film-authors, but also the film
industry. Who would benefit from the shortening of the copyright term?
Truly only those, who exploit copyright protected content without being
willing to pay for the exploitation of such content. It should not be
forgotten in this context that the protection of intellectual property is a
human right (Art 17/2 of the EU Charta)!

21.

No

The current EU law and international treaties provide sufficient
flexibility for copyright and exceptions and limitations. There is no
practical need for any new exceptions or to make the existing exceptions
under the Info-Soc-Directive mandatory, as there is no evidenced need for
such legislative changes. CMOs provide various solutions through dedicated
licensing for teaching, educational institutions, research etc. There is no
problem with the fact that most exceptions provided in EU copyright
directives are optional for the Member States. The list of exceptions of
the 2001/29/EC Directive is very long and encompasses all possible
exceptions in the EU, but not for direct implementation by all Member
States. Making this list mandatory would severely undermine the protection
of authors’ rights.

22.

No

There is no reason nor is there a justification for such a step. The
principle of subsidiarity has to be respected. Moreover, the current legal
frame is sufficient and provides the flexibility required in the current
harmonization process.

23.

There is no need to add or remove limitations and exceptions to/from the
existing catalogue. The existing catalogue reflects a good compromise at EU
level.

24.

No

I am definitely against the introduction of a US-type “fair use” exception
in Europe, since it is not adapted to EU-law and provides no legal
certainty as issues can only be resolved in front of the courts. A higher
number of disputes and court cases would be fundamentally in contradiction
with the Single Market objectives.

25.

-

26.

The territoriality of exceptions and limitations matches the
“territoriality principle” of copyright and respects different legal and
cultural specificities in the member states. I think, that the
territoriality of limitations and exceptions do not constitute any
problems.

27.

It seems reasonable that fair compensation is due in the place where the
end user benefits from the exception, as is the case, for example, with the
private copying exception (levies are due in the country in which the
“harm” to the rightholder arises, i.e. in the country in which the end user
who bought the product resides according to the “Opus ruling” of the CJUE).
In addition, it is crucial that remuneration is provided to the
rightholders in the country where they reside, which is possible because of
reciprocal agreements between collective management organizations.

28.

No


29.

-

30.

-

31.

As far as “film heritage institutions” are concerned, the 2001 Copyright
Directive provides for carefully crafted exceptions addressing the needs of
publicly accessible libraries, educational establishments, museums and
archives. These exceptions allow film archive institutions to fulfil their
public interest missions.
Above these exceptions, various European CMOs have offered their help to
film and audiovisual archives institutions on many occasions to address
their needs in relation to the use of the cinematographic and audiovisual
works contained in their collections and their related authors’ rights.
This has resulted in specific arrangements in a number of countries:
collective agreements in France, mandatory collective administration of
broadcasters’ archives in Switzerland, extended collective agreements in
the Netherlands and in the Nordic countries, etc. The Commission should
work as a facilitator to encourage film archive institutions and their
European representatives to explore the possibility of further agreements
with audiovisual authors’ organisations whether at national or EU level.

32.

32c –No

33.

-

34.

-

35.

-

36.

No

37.

-

38.

-

39.

Because of the nature of the internet, the difference between libraries’
traditional activities and online consultation and e-lending is huge. The
conditions for these new activities have to be discussed with authors’
representative organisations like CMOs through licencing processes which
will allow libraries to develop these new activities and for authors to be
remunerated.

40.

No Opinion

41.

Yes

I am fully committed to pursue the project that was started in the
“Licences for Europe” (Audiovisual and Film Heritage Institutions) process
and to find a way to undertake mass digitization and clearance for online
uses of the high volume of older works in the archives of film heritage
institutions and public services broadcasters. Audiovisual authors’ CMOs
have a central role to play in helping these institutions preserve and
offer to the public the cultural heritage of great works.
Thanks to the “Statement of Principles and Procedures for heritage films
online” concluded between ACE, FERA, FIAPF and the SAA during “Licences for
Europe”, film heritage institutions and rightholders’ representatives now
have a clear roadmap to discuss and agree terms for digitizing, restoring
and making available European film heritage. It will enable film heritage
institutions to free up European films stored in their archives while
guaranteeing rightholders an appropriate share of the rewards.
As far as broadcasters’ archives are concerned, no broad agreement
including all stakeholders could be reached during the “Licences for
Europe” timeframe. EBU and the SAA together developed some recommendations
highlighting that collective licensing solutions are particularly suitable
for the large scale clearance of rights. This would help make a very
significant amount of works available, particularly for research and
educational purposes. Further discussions are needed to develop a MoU or
any other type of general agreement that would propose a suitable solution
for mass digitization and rights clearance of broadcasters’ archives based
on collective management.

42.

-

43.

No Opinion

44.

-


45.

-

46.

-

47.

I think that the current international and European provisions provide the
necessary flexibility for copyright and exceptions and limitations. There
is currently no need to introduce any new exceptions, as for e.g. teaching,
educational institutions, research etc. already sufficient exceptions
exist.

48.

-

49.

-

50.

No

51.

-


52.

-

53.

No Opinion

54.

-

55.

-

56.

-

57.

-

58.

Many creators, also those who grant licenses to third parties on the basis
of creative commons licenses, find it unacceptable that persons relying on
their content do not respect their moral rights, in particular the right of
attribution as well the adaptation right. In practice, creators who devote
their professional life to the creation of works, do not consider it a
compliment if their finished work is adapted, amended or changed by others.
At the same time, persons exploiting and disrespecting rights of others in
this manner frequently have the intention of exploiting such creations of
others in order to monetize them, eg on Youtube, for their own benefit.
Every creator therefore should have the right to effectively and
efficiently be able to enforce how third parties use his or her work.
Whether the third party has commercial interests should not be decisive in
order to be in control.
I believe that I as rightholder shall be the one entitled to decide about
who exploits my works and in what manner the exploitation of my works
occurs. Mainly, I do not want my works being exploited together with
content or in a context I cannot identify myself with. E.g. if my film gets
synched with a song by a right-winged-extremist group, I as rightholder
should have the right to prohibit such a usage. Besides that I believe it
is unfair, if someone else makes money with my works and I have no
financial benefit from that. Online Services that financially benefit from
users, who produce and upload videos containing works that do not belong to
them in large quantities and who do that for free, should be obliged to
remunerate the producers and film authors of the exploited works!

59.

No Opinion

60.

No Opinion

61.

The use of pre-existing protected works to create user-generated content
needs the authorisation of the authors or their representatives (in
particular, to guarantee respect for moral rights), unless an exception can
be invoked.

62.

-

63.

As traditional media are usually obliged to produce European content and as
broadcasters are obliged to broadcast such content, I consider it to be
discriminating that new media are not obliged to contribute to the
financing of such content at all.

64.

No

The CJEU has given necessary interpretation and guidelines to clarify the
application of private copying exception and since the interpretation of
other substantive issues are currently pending with the Court, there is no
need to deal further with the scope and application of the system at EU
level.
Rightholders have provided all the necessary practical and operational
solutions to implement those decisions for a smoother and more streamlined
functioning of the Internal Market.
Currently the only missing element is the willingness of the manufacturers
and distributors of recording devices (almost all of which are non-EU
companies) to comply with EU law.

65.

Yes

“Licensing” and application of “private copying levies” co-exist and they
are not mutually exclusive. This point of view has already been clarified
by the CJEU in its “VG Wort vs. Kyocera” ruling.
One of Mr. Vitorino’s recommendations (“licensed copies do not cause harm”)
suggests that all subsequent copies made of a work following purchase from
digital services can be covered by licenses granted by rightholders to
these services. Mr. Vitorino therefore proposed to eliminate levies for
“new business models in the digital environment”. This is based on a gross
misconception of both the private copying system and the multitude of new
digital services which provide access to protected works. Private copies
cannot be licensed since they are covered by a statutory exception to
copyright under the 2001/29 Copyright Directive.
Therefore “licensing” and “fair compensation for private copying” can only
be separate issues. Moreover, if the private copying exception was
questioned and private copies inserted into licences, the ones that would
suffer most from such a change would be consumers and authors, the
consumers losing their freedom to copy and the authors their fair
compensation.
In practice, the authorisation, licence fee and commercial terms are
negotiated by the holders of exclusive rights with each digital service
during the licensing process, whereas fair compensation is collected
through the levy system and distributed to rightholders by CMOs. Mr.
Vitorino’s proposal derives from the flawed idea that digital services
would allow rightholders to be compensated directly. In practice, only few
rightholders or categories of rightholders grant licences to digital
services (the producers or further intermediaries).
Other rightholders, such as audiovisual authors who transferred their
exclusive rights to the producer sometimes for a lump-sum payment, do not
have any direct relation with digital services and therefore, no
possibility to be paid directly.
In this field, a huge advantage of the private copying system is that it
corrects inequalities between rightholders and guarantees that each
category of rightholders benefits from a fair share of the value.


66.

I believe that the application of levies to certain online services is
justified and does not think that it would hinder the development and
functioning of new business models. One of the main reasons is that, just
like the prices of products across Europe do not vary in proportion to the
levy rates, the prices of online services/new business models are most
probably also unaffected by the levy rates.
More copying for private use takes place now than ever before. The devices
and media which enable or host private copies of protected works have
increased, with storage capacities which have grown exponentially.
Consumers transfer songs and videos from computers to hard drives to phones
to tablets to online lockers and back again in order to save and access
their personal libraries whenever and wherever they want. All of these
processes are undeniably acts of private copying.
In addition, in line with the principle of technical neutrality, copies
made via “cloud services” (and other future digital services which do not
yet exist) many have the same purpose (private use) as the copies made by
private individuals on their phones, tablets, etc. so should be included in
the private copying system.
Applying private copying to certain cloud-based services means that copies
made on those specific cloud-based services would be taken into account by
usage studies which assess the harm caused.

67.

I agree with the objective, but does not believe that this technical point
requires a legislative change at EU level within the Info-Soc Directive.
This is certainly not a big problem in terms of cross-border application of
levies. In fact, it is already applied in some Member States and its
application can easily be extended to all Member States with the agreement
of all stakeholders involved.
Past and recent consultation processes on private copying levies have shown
that stakeholders agree that levies should be clearly visible on all bills
and contracts in the products’ sales chain (this is for example already the
case in Belgium thanks to a new Belgian law applicable since 1st of
December 2013) and on consumers’ invoices and till receipts. In addition,
consumers should be informed of the amount and destination of the levies
and more generally the reason for this mechanism which compensates the
freedom to copy they have thanks to the private copying exception. This
would help consumers understand how important the levy system is for the
EU’s culture and rightholders and that they are part of and benefit from
this virtuous system.
Anyway and for the sake of transparency, consumers should be informed how
much of the product/services price is due to copyright levies.

68.

No

The CJEU has already clarified all these issues in its recent judgments. As
long as the rulings of the Court are followed, there is no need for any
further legislative “clarification” at EU level.
Following the “Opus ruling” by the CJEU the rule would be that the levy is
due in the Member State in which the final user who purchased the product
resides since that is where the “harm” to the rightholder would arise. In
any case, even if undue levy payments occasionally did occur, “ex-ante
exemptions” and “ex-post-reimbursement systems” should be in place to
ensure that such equipment does not bear levies.




69.

I think that devices and blank media can serve other purposes than for the
private copying of protected works. This should be taken into account when
determining tariffs applicable to devices used to make private copies. In
addition, there are cases where certain devices and media will clearly not
be used for the purpose of private copying (e.g. “professional uses”). In
this context, ex-ante-exemptions and ex-post- reimbursement systems should
be in place to ensure that the equipment concerned does not bear levies.
However, exempting any business from private copying levies would be
excessive, since equipment bought by companies can also generate private
copies (e.g. business handys that are also used to store music for private
use).
It is important to point out that the determining factor should in any way
be the nature of the use, not the quality of the purchaser.
As recommended by the CJEU in the “Padawan”ruling (C-467/08), professional
uses should be excluded from payment of the levy, but not necessarily all
purchases of professional users. Devices such as tablets or smartphones,
despite being the property of a company, may well in fact be used by
employees to copy protected works for private use. Recommending that
private copying levies should apply exclusively to purchases by natural
persons as private users would artificially reduce the scope of the private
copying system.
Exemption and refund systems for professional uses should be designed at
national level in consideration of the specificities of the Member States
concerned.
The “Austro-Mechana” CJEU ruling (C-521/11) confirmed that reimbursement
schemes for the levies paid on devices that are not ultimately used for
private purposes comply with EU law, as long as they are effectively
applied and do not constitute an excessive burden for those who are
entitled to reimbursement.

70.

see above

71.

firstly the rightholders’ proposal to introduce a single declaration point
would facilitate declaration and payment procedures by
manufacturers/importers. The proposal to create a single European
declaration was put forward by European rightholders during the 2008- 2009
dialogue, and agreed with the ICT industry. It aims to facilitate the
implementation of the “Opus” ruling of the CJEU (C- 462/09). Via the
“European Central Point” mechanism, distance sellers could submit
declarations of sales of goods eligible to private copying levies at a
single EU entry point, while the compensation would be invoiced and paid in
the country of destination.
Secondly, the most efficient and cost-effective way to collect levies is to
do so at the earliest stage of the sales chain, i.e. the manufacture or
import stage. Shifting the liability to pay levies onto retailers, as
proposed by Mr. Vitorino, would render the system extremely complex and
costly since this would significantly increase the number of those
responsible for paying the levies and the means needed to ensure billing
and control systems.
The prime responsibility of manufacturers and importers for payment of the
levies must go hand in hand with joint liability of all entities throughout
the chain of sales down to the final consumer in order to avoid potential
fraud and unfair competition. This principle was also agreed between
representatives of rightholders and the ICT industry during the 2008-2009
dialogue.
Thirdly, the fact that leviable devices and blank media differ across
Member States means that the same product can be subject to private copying
levies in a Member State and not in another. Compensation systems should be
in place for all devices and media whose value is increased by multimedia
storage and playback features. Therefore, a consistent definition of
devices and media subject to private copying levies in the respective
Member States should be sought. Rightholders’ organisations proposed during
the 2008-2009 dialogue that all products (devices and media) able to be
used to make private copies of protected works should be eligible for the
private copying compensation scheme, with a list of products established
and regularly updated at EU level. However, the interruption of the
dialogue by the ICT industry in 2010 did not end in any concrete result and
the Vitorino report was a missed opportunity as, despite suggesting a
degree of harmonisation (such as regarding the definition of harm), Mr.
Vitorino recommended Member State flexibility in the choice of devices
subject to levies.
Fourthly,I agree that a quick and harmonised levy setting procedure should
be developed across Europe. This would mean putting in place a European
framework of definitions, principles and procedures to be respected by all
Member States in the establishment of their levy setting process.

72.

Fair remuneration of authors is a very important issue related in
particular to the online distribution of audiovisual works. For audiovisual
authors, such a “best mechanism” to ensure that they receive adequate
remuneration for the exploitation of their works does not yet exist.
“Adequate remuneration” should relate to the use made of the authors’ works
and should in particular reward the success of works. This is why “buy-out
contracts”, which prevent this from happening, would never amount to
mechanisms guaranteeing adequate remuneration. Contractual practices in the
vast majority of European countries deprive audiovisual authors of their
rights and prevent them from receiving fair remuneration, not only but in
particular for the online distribution of their works. Audiovisual authors
in most countries are forced, because of their weak bargaining position and
the absence of legislation to protect them, to assign all their rights and
receive a one-off fee at the production stage with no further payments
linked to the exploitation of the work, except for collectively managed
rights such as “cable retransmission” and “private copying”.
These further payments linked to the exploitation of the work (which can
continue for years) are however essential for authors to make a living in-
between projects. The characteristic of this profession is that it can take
years to prepare a film and enter into production.
I therefore proposes to by-pass these unfair contractual practices and to
develop a sustainable remuneration system which would secure audiovisual
authors’ remuneration for their making available right in the digital
market, taking advantage of the new technologies.
Such a proposal for European legislation builds on the harmonisation
experience in the EU, e.g. the 1992 Rental Right Directive which provides
for an “unwaivable remuneration right for the rental” or the 1993 Cable and
Satellite Directive which provides for mandatory collective administration
of the “cable retransmission right”.
Concerning “online uses” and in the case an audiovisual author has
transferred his making available right to a producer, he should retain the
right to obtain “equitable remuneration” for the “making available” which
cannot be waived, as it is the case for the “rental right”. The equitable
remuneration should be paid by audiovisual media services that make
audiovisual works available to the public on- demand. Its administration
should be entrusted to collective management organisations representing
audiovisual authors, unless other audiovisual authors’ organisations, such
as unions or guilds, are in a better position to guarantee such
remuneration in a specific country.
This European legislation is a necessity as contractual practices are
unable to guarantee such remuneration to audiovisual authors for the making
available of their works. European producers, which are mainly small
companies, are very much focused on the production stage and little
involved in the subsequent exploitation. They have therefore not developed
industrial processes and mechanisms to trace and administer payments due to
authors for the distribution of their works on multiple platforms and most
of them would prefer not to do it at all since it would be costly. The only
entities to do this are authors’ collective management organisations. They
are today ready to invest further in order to address the remuneration due
to audiovisual authors for the online distribution of their works.
It has to be clarified that this proposal does not interfere with the
producer’s role. It aims at organising the remuneration due to authors,
once the producer has decided to make the work available to the public in
such a manner and at the time he chooses. It therefore means that any on-
demand exploitation of an audiovisual work will continue to have to be
cleared with the producer or with the making available right holder
appointed by the producer or subsequent contractor.
Be it offline or online exploitations, collective management is the best
solution to strike a balance between easy rights clearance, legal certainty
and adequate remuneration for audiovisual authors.

73.

I definitely support fairer contractual terms and practices, whilst
acknowledging that this will not solve all the problems, in particular the
remuneration issue of audiovisual authors for the exploitation of their
works. Any initiative in this field should therefore at least complement
the introduction into EU legislation of an unwaivable right to remuneration
of audiovisual authors for their making available right, based on the
revenues generated from the online distribution of their works and
collected by collective management organisations from final distributors.

74.

In most European countries, audiovisual authors suffer from unfair
contractual terms (excessive transfer of rights in terms of scope and
duration, transfer of rights to remuneration, etc.) imposed by producers or
broadcasters in the individual negotiation of their contract. These
negotiations too often result in “buy-out contracts”, authors receiving a
lump sum payment for the writing and/or directing of the film, with no
further payment no matter how commercially successful the film goes on to
be. Even when authors sign contracts which respect their economic interests
and provide for additional remuneration, they rarely receive any payment
automatically, except when collective rules are in place and enforced in
particular by collective rights management organisations.
In parallel to European initiatives to ensure proper remuneration of
authors, consideration should be given to developing key standards for fair
and enforceable contractual terms in individual contracts, including the
prohibition of certain clauses in contracts.
In addition, one way of ensuring the enforceability of fair contractual
terms would be that producers applying for public funds for the production
of films and audiovisual works should be obliged to provide a copy of
authors’ contracts among the documentation. The body providing for the
financial support would have the obligation to check it. This would be a
strong incentive for producers to better respect authors’ rights as it
would become a pre-condition for obtaining public financial support.


75.

No

The scope of the question and clarifications of the civil enforcement
system in the EU should not be limited to infringements committed with a
“commercial purpose”. All infringements should be punished, but of course
sanctions should be more severe for commercial purpose infringements.
Leaving all “non-commercial” acts out of protection would not comply with
the respect for the exclusive rights provided by international and European
copyright law.
I believe that the respect for rights and the enforcement of rights are as
important as the scope and definition of the rights themselves. The “safe
harbour regime” provided by the “E-Commerce- Directive” should therefore be
re-considered for copyright related activities.

76.

I strongly encourage the Commission to examine the possibility of
integrating a “notice and takedown” type mechanism in the future revised
Enforcement Directive. In addition the notification procedure (and the
information to be provided) as well as the impact of this procedure, i.e.
the action to be taken by the hosting provider (immediate take down, or as
quickly as possible within 24 hours) and stay down of illegal content (not
just the links to it) should be harmonised.
In addition, cooperation between rightholders and intermediaries could also
lead to the development of useful “filtering technologies” which could be
developed by platforms and implemented at the stage when users upload
content onto their servers. This filtering technology would be based on
databases of works which have been registered, with a view to identifying
and blocking illegal content. In this context, cooperation between rights
holders and providers is an essential key to developing such databases of
protected content and should therefore be encouraged.

77.

No

According to the Court of Justice of the European Union a fair balance must
be struck between the various rights at stake (such as the right to data
protection and the right to property, which includes IPR) given that both
are recognised as fundamental rights by the Charter of Fundamental Rights
of the European Union.
In addition, the limited scope of the right to information to acts carried
out on a commercial scale (article 8 of the Directive) prevents the full
exercise of the right to information in all infringing situations.
The Commission should take the opportunity of any revision of the
Enforcement Directive to guarantee an effective balance between IPR and the
data protection right, in order to allow the provision on the right of
information to effectively protect right holders.

78.

No

79.

I do not see the need for “an optional unitary EU Copyright Title” as
already proposed by the Commission in its “Green Paper on the online
distribution of audiovisual works”. This proposal was first made by the
Commission in 2009 and then repeated in several documents but the
Commission never explained the need for and the use of such a title. The
only information delivered in the Green Paper was that “authors or
producers of audiovisual works would have the option to register their
works and then obtain a single title that would be valid throughout the
EU”. This very brief presentation raises two questions: the registration
condition and the nature of the title.
In terms of copyright protection, the Berne Convention prohibits any
formality such as registration as a condition for the enjoyment and
exercise of rights. Authors are very much attached to this prohibition
which guarantees their rights in all circumstances as far as their creation
is original and therefore deserves protection. Consequently, authors are
very reluctant to see any system based on registration as it endangers
their authorship of works.
From a practical point of view, to pursue such a proposal, the Commission
should then either undertake to revise the Berne convention or to define
the nature of the title out of the copyright sphere.
Because of the formality prohibition, such titles do not exist in the
copyright sphere. The only existing registries in the audiovisual sector
have limited scope and impact which do not affect rights’ protection and
exercise (for example the necessary work declaration to an authors’ society
for an author to receive related payments, or the French cinema public
registry which offers the statutory publication of certain contracts).

80.

-Investing in new technology, software and systems to keep their licensing
operations fit for purpose -Improving their governance, transparency and
accountability to members and users
-Simplifying their licensing procedures to reduce transaction costs
-Innovating in the kind of licences being offered
-Making it a central objective to see the works of members receive the
greatest possible
legitimate distribution
-Promoting the use of copyright works for education and cultural purposes
-Making it a priority to engage young people directly whether they are
users or creators of
copyright works – and sometimes both at the same time – so that they learn
respect for the value of creativity and are encouraged to express
themselves creatively.








