


Public Consultation

on the review of the EU copyright rules

Contents

I.  Introduction  2

A.  Context of the consultation  2

B.  How to submit replies to this questionnaire  3

C.  Confidentiality  3

II.  Rights and the functioning of the Single Market  7

A.  Why is it not possible to access many online content
services from anywhere in Europe?  7

B.  Is there a need for more clarity as regards the scope of
what needs to be authorised (or not) in digital transmissions?
10

1.  The act of “making available”  10

2.  Two rights involved in asingle act of exploitation  11

3.  Linking and browsing  12

4.  Download to own digital content  13

C.  Registration of works and other subject matter – is it a
good idea?  14

D.  How to improve the use and interoperability of identifiers
15

E.  Term of protection – is it appropriate?  15

III.  Limitations and exceptions in the Single Market  16

A.  Access to content in libraries and archives  19

1.  Preservation and archiving  19

2.  Off-premises access to library collections  20

3.  E – lending  21

4.  Mass digitisation  22

B.  Teaching  23

C.  Research  25

D.  Disabilities  25

E.  Text and data mining  27

F.  User-generated content  28

IV.  Private copying and reprography  31

V.  Fair remuneration of authors and performers  33

VI.  Respect for rights  34

VII.  A single EU Copyright Title  36

VIII.  Other issues  36

Introduction

Contextof the consultation

Over the last two decades, digital technology and the Internet
have reshaped the ways in which content is created,
distributed, and accessed. New opportunities have materialised
for those that create and produce content (e.g. a film, anovel,
a song), for new and existing distribution platforms, for
institutions such as libraries, for activities such as research
and for citizens who now expect to be able to access content –
for information, education or entertainment purposes –
regardless of geographical borders.

This new environment also presents challenges. One of them is
for the market to continue to adapt to new forms of
distribution and use. Another one is for the legislator to
ensure that the system of rights, limitations to rights and
enforcement remains appropriate and is adapted to the new
environment. This consultation focuses on the second of these
challenges: ensuring that the EU copyright regulatory framework
stays fit for purpose in the digital environment to support
creation and innovation, tap the full potential of the Single
Market, foster growth and investment in our economy and promote
cultural diversity.

In its "Communication on Content in the Digital Single Market"1

COM (2012)789 final, 18/12/2012.

the Commission set out two parallel tracks of action:on the one
hand, to complete its on-going effort to review and to
modernise the EU copyright legislative framework2

As announced in the Intellectual Property Strategy ' A single
market for Intellectual Property Rights: COM (2011)287 final,
24/05/2011.

3

"Based on market studies and impact assessment and legal
drafting work"as announced in the Communication (2012)789.

with a view to a decision in 2014 on whether to table
legislative reform proposals, andon the other, to facilitate
practical industry-led solutions through the stakeholder
dialogue "Licences for Europe" on issues on which rapid
progress was deemed necessary and possible.

The "Licences for Europe" process has been finalised now4

See the document “Licences for Europe – tem pledges to bring
more content
online”:http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/copyright/docs/licences-for-europe/131113_ten-pledges_en.pdf.

. The Commission welcomes the practical solutions stakeholders
have put forward in this context and will monitor their
progress. Pledges have been made by stakeholders in all four
Working Groups (cross border portability of services,
user-generated content, audiovisual and film heritage and text
and data mining). Taken together, the Commission expects these
pledges to be a further step in making the user environment
easier in many different situations. The Commission also takes
note of the fact that two groups – user-generated content and
text and data mining – did not reach consensus among
participating stakeholders on either the problems to be
addressed or on the results. The discussions and results of
"Licences for Europe" will be also taken into account in the
context of the review of the legislative framework.

As part of the review process, theCommission is now launching a
public consultation on issues identified in the Communication
on Content in the Digital Single Market, i.e.:"territoriality
in the Internal Market, harmonisation, limitations and
exceptions to copyright in the digital age; fragmentation of
the EU copyright market; and how to improve the effectiveness
and efficiency of enforcement while underpinning its legitimacy
in the wider context of copyright reform". As highlighted in the
October 2013 European CouncilConclusions5

EUCO169/13, 24/25 October 2013.

"Providing digital services and content across the single market
requires the establishment of a copyright regime for the digital
age. The Commission will therefore complete its on-going review
of the EU copyright framework in spring 2014. It is important
to modernise Europe's copyright regime and facilitate
licensing, while ensuring a high level protection of
intellectual property rights and taking into account cultural
diversity".

This consultation builds on previous consultations and public
hearings, in particular those on the "Green Paper on copyright
in the knowledge economy"6

COM(2008)
466/3,http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/copyright/copyright-infso/index_en.htm#maincontentSec2.

, the "Green Paper on the online distribution of audiovisual
works"7

COM(2011) 427
final,http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/consultations/2011/audiovisual_en.htm.

and "Content Online"8

http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/consultations/2009/content_online_en.htm.

. These consultations provided valuable feedback from
stakeholders on a number of questions, on issues as diverse as
the territoriality of copyright and possible ways to overcome
territoriality, exceptions related to the online
disseminationof knowledge, and rightholders’ remuneration,
particularly in the audiovisual sector. Views were expressed by
stakeholders representing all stages in the value chain,
including right holders, distributors, consumers, and
academics. The questions elicited widely diverging views on the
best way to proceed. The "Green Paper on Copyright in the
Knowledge Economy" was followed up by a Communication. The
replies to the "Green Paper on the online distribution of
audiovisual works" have fed into subsequent discussions on the
Collective Rights Management Directive and into the current
review process.

How to submit replies to this questionnaire

You are kindly asked to send your repliesby 5 February 2014as a
word or pdf document to the following e-mail address of
DGInternal Market and
Services:markt-copyright-consultation@ec.europa.eu. Please note
that replies sent after that date will not be taken into
account.

This consultation is addressed to different categories of
stakeholders. To the extent possible, the questions indicate
the category/ies of respondents most likely to be concerned by
them (annotation in brackets, before the actual question).
Respondents should nevertheless feel free to reply to any/all
of the questions. Also, please note that, apart from the
question concerning the identification of the respondent, none
of the questions is obligatory. Replies containing answers only
to part of the questions will be also accepted.

You are requested to provide your answers directly within this
consultation document. For the “Yes/No/No opinion” questions
please put the selected answer inboldandunderlineit so it is
easy for us to see your selection.

In your answers to the questions, you are invited to refer to
the situation in EU Member States.You are also invited in
particular to indicate, where relevant, what would be the
impact of options you put forward in terms of costs,
opportunities and revenues.

The public consultation is available in English. Responses may,
however, be sent in any of the 24 official languages of the EU.

Confidentiality

The contributions received in this round of consultation as well
as a summary report presenting the responses in a statistical
and aggregated form will be published on the website of DG
MARKT.

Please note that all contributions received will be published
together with the identity of the contributor, unless the
contributor objects to the publication of their personal data
on the grounds that such publication would harm his or her
legitimate interests. In this case, the contribution will be
published in anonymous form upon the contributor's explicit
request. Otherwise the contribution will not be published nor
will its content be reflected in the summary report.

Pleaseread ourPrivacy statement.

Please identify yourself:

Name:

Amelia Andersdotter

In the interests of transparency, organisations (including, for
example, NGOs, trade associations and commercial enterprises)
areinvited to provide the public with relevant information
about themselves by registering in the Interest Representative
Register and subscribing to its Code of Conduct.

If you are a Registered organisation, please indicate your
Register ID number below. Your contribution will then be
considered as representing the views of your organisation.

…………………………………………………………………………………………………..

…………………………………………………………………………………………………..

If your organisation is not registered, you have the opportunity
toregister now. Responses from organisations not registered will
be published separately.

If you would like to submit your reply on an anonymous basis
please indicate it belowby underlining the following answer:

Yes, I would like to submit my reply on an anonymous basis

Type of respondent(Pleaseunderlinethe appropriate):

End user/consumer(e.g. internet user, reader, subscriber to
music or audiovisual service, researcher, student) OR
Representative of end users/consumers

for the purposes of this questionnaire normally referred to
in questions as"end users/consumers"

Institutional user(e.g. school, university, research centre,
library, archive) OR Representative of institutional users

for the purposes of this questionnaire normally referred to
in questions as"institutional users"

Author/Performer OR Representative of authors/performers

Publisher/Producer/Broadcaster OR Representative of
publishers/producers/broadcasters

the two above categoriesare,for the purposes of this
questionnaire, normally referred to in questions as"right
holders"

Intermediary/Distributor/Other service provider(e.g. online
music or audiovisual service, games platform, social media,
search engine, ICT industry)OR Representative of
intermediaries/distributors/other service providers

for the purposes of this questionnaire normally referred to
in questions as"service providers"

Collective Management Organisation

Public authority

Member State

Other(Please explain):

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Rights and the functioning of the Single Market

Why isit not possible to access many online content services
from anywhere in Europe?[The territorial scope of the rights
involved in digital transmissions and the segmentation of the
market through licensing agreements]

Holders of copyright and related rights – e.g. writers, singers,
musicians - do not enjoy a single protection in the EU. Instead,
they are protected on the basis of a bundle of national rights
in each Member State. Those rights have been largely harmonised
by the existing EU Directives. However, differences remain and
the geographical scope of the rights is limited to the
territory of the Member State granting them. Copyright is thus
territorial in the sense that rights are acquired and enforced
on a country-by-country basis under national law9

This principle has been confirmed by the Court of justice on
several occasions.

.

The dissemination of copyright-protected content on the Internet
– e.g. by a music streaming service, or by an online e-book
seller – therefore requires, in principle, anauthorisation for
each national territory in which the content is communicated to
the public. Rightholders are, of course, in a position to grant
a multi-territorial or pan-European licence, such that content
services can be provided in several Member States and across
borders. A number of steps have been taken at EU level to
facilitate multi-territorial licences: the proposal for a
Directive on Collective Rights Management10

Proposal for a Directive of the European Parliament and of the
Council of 11 July2012 on collective management of copyright
and related rights and multi-territorial licensing of rights in
musical works for online uses in the internal market, COM(2012)
372 final.

should significantly facilitate the delivery of
multi-territorial licences in musical works for online
services11

Collective Management Organisations play a significant role in
the management of online rights for musical works in contrast
to the situation where online rights are licensed directly by
right holders such as filmor record producers or by newspaper
or book publishers.

; the structured stakeholder dialogue “Licences for Europe”12

You can find more information on the following website:
http://ec.europa.eu/licences-for-europe-dialogue/.

and market-led developments such as the on-going work in the
Linked Content Coalition13

You can find more information on the following
website:http://www.linkedcontentcoalition.org/.

.

"Licences for Europe" addressed in particular the specific issue
of cross-border portability, i.e. the ability of consumers
having subscribed to online services in their Member State to
keep accessing them when travelling temporarilyto other Member
States. As a result, representatives of the audio-visual sector
issued a joint statement affirming their commitment to continue
working towards the further development of cross-border
portability14

See the document “Licences for Europe – tem pledges to bring
more content
online”:http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/copyright/docs/licences-for-europe/131113_ten-pledges_en.pdf.

.

Despite progress, there are continued problems with the
cross-border provision of, and access to, services. These
problems are most obvious to consumers wanting to access
services that are made available in Member States other than
the one in which they live. Not all online services are
available in all Member States and consumers face problems when
trying to access such services across borders. In some
instances, even if the “same” service is available in all
Member States, consumers cannot access the service across
borders (they can only access their “national” service, and if
they try to access the "same" service in another Member State
they are redirected to the one designated for their country of
residence).

This situation may in part stem from the territoriality of
rights and difficulties associated with the clearing of rights
in different territories. Contractual clauses in licensing
agreements between right holders and distributors and/or
between distributors and end users may also be at the origin of
some of the problems (denial of access, redirection).

The main issue at stake here is, therefore, whether further
measures (legislative or non-legislative, including market-led
solutions) need to be taken at EU level in the medium term15

For possible long term measures such as the establishment of a
European Copyright Code (establishing a single title) see
section VII of this consultation document.

to increase the cross-border availability of content services in
the Single Market, while ensuring an adequate level of
protection for right holders.

[In particular if you are an end user/consumer:]Have you faced
problems when trying to access online services in an EU Member
State other than the one in which you live?

 YES - Please provide examples indicating the Member State,
the sector and the type of content concerned (e.g. premium
content suchas certain films and TV series, audio-visual
content in general, music, e-books, magazines, journals and
newspapers, games, applications and other software)

I Sverige har jag haft problemet att jag inte kan använda
torrent-trackers utan att man genomför lagändringar som
kriminaliserar både mig och de som kör torrent-trackerserna. I
Tyskland, Frankrike och Belgien har jag ofta upplevt att jag
inte kan titta på Youtube-filmer eller annat streamat material
på grund av upphovsrättsbekymmer. Ofta har jag inte tillgång
till akademiska artiklar och böcker som är digitaliserade på
grund av kopieringsskydd. Det är väldigt irriterande eftersom
jag väldigt gärna vill förstå saker och gärna läser om saker
och utbildar mig. Under stora sportevenemang som OS har jag
intekunnat titta på sändningar med något kommentarsspår alls,
trots att jag pratar 5 språk eftersom licensieringen för
kommentarsspåren inte fungerar. Jag blir då tvungen att på
teknisk väg arbeta mig runt begränsningarna med VPN-tunnlar och
annat - detta är jobbigt och tar tid som det inte borde ta. I
Nederländerna har jag inte kunnat få tag på streamingtjänster
för att licensieringen inte fungerar ordentligt. Dessutom
försvinner torrent-trackers eftersom de blir stämningshotade.
Mina favoritgrupper på Usenetfår inte finnas kvar. I ett rent
dekadent försök att förkovra mig i Luxembourgs historia
upptäckte jag att man inte kan få tag på tidningsarkiv på
nätet som är yngre än 150 år gamla. Samma situation infinner
sig i Sverige och alla andra EU-länder: digitalisering fungerar
inte och det är i stort sett omöjligt att få tag på relevanta,
lättillgängliga versioner av digitaliserat material från andra
europeiska länder för att förstå kulturell, historisk kontext.
På grund av konstiga regler kring public broadcasting kan jag
inte titta på svensk public service-TV eller lyssna på radio
enkelt när jag befinner mig utanför Sverige. Detta problem
förvärras ju äldre materialet är. Det enda tyska
TV-materialet jag har stark kännedom om är Schnappi das Kleine
Krokodil, trots Tysklands uppenbart stora tv-kultur-rikedom.

 NO

 NO OPINION

[In particular if you are a service provider:]Have you faced
problems when seeking to provide online services across borders
in the EU?

 YES - Please explain whether such problems, in your
experience, are related to copyright or to other issues (e.g.
business decisions relating to the cost of providing services
across borders, compliance with other laws such as consumer
protection)? Please provide examples indicating the Member
State, thesector and the type of content concerned (e.g.
premium content such as certain films and TV series,
audio-visual content in general, music, e-books, magazines,
journals and newspapers, games, applications and other
software).

Jag försökte under en längretidsperiod att aktivt bidra till
olika communitys och nätverk som förenklar distribution av
kulturellt material. Särskilt uppskattar jag äldre italo disco,
och deltog i flera distributionsnätverk för detta. Tyvärr
lyckades jag och mina med-musikfantasteraldrig särskilt bra och
blev kriminella istället, eftersom man ändrade lagen emot oss.

 NO

 NO OPINION

[In particular if you are a right holder or a collective
management organisation:]How often are you asked to grant
multi-territorial licences? Please indicate, if possible, the
number of requests per year and provide examples indicating the
Member State, the sector and the type of content concerned.

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

If you have identified problems in the answers to any of the
questions above – what would be the best way to tackle them?

[Open question]

Vi behöver ändra upphovsrättenlagen. Den behöver göras
merflexibel. Vi behöver en upphovsrättslag som stödjer social
interaktion, innovation och samarbete över de europeiska
gränserna. Vi behöver en upphovsrätt som inte per automatik
tror att de kreativa industrierna inte kan vara kreativa med
sina affärsmodeller, och som inte utgår ifrån att vanliga
människor är kulturens fiender. Kultur är någonting vi bygger
tillsammans, inom och över gränser, och upphovsrätten måste
tillåta det.

[In particular if you are a right holder or a collective
managementorganisation:]Are there reasons why, even in cases
where you hold all the necessary rights for all the territories
in question, you would still find it necessary or justified to
impose territorial restrictions on a service provider (in
order, for instance, to ensure that access to certain content
is not possible in certain European countries)?

 YES – Please explain by giving examples

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO

 NO OPINION

[In particular if you are e.g. a broadcaster or a service
provider:]Are there reasons why, even in cases where you have
acquired all the necessary rights for all the territories in
question, you would still find it necessary or justified to
impose territorial restrictions on the service recipient (in
order for instance, to redirect the consumer to a different
website than the one he is trying to access)?

 YES – Please explain by giving examples

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO

 NO OPINION

Do you think that further measures (legislative or
non-legislative, including market-led solutions) are needed at
EU level to increase the cross-border availability of content
services in the Single Market, while ensuring an adequate level
of protection for right holders?

YES – Please explain

Vi behöver en upphovsrättsreform så snart som möjligt! Vi har
väntat alldeles för länge med att faktiskt ändra på lagen om
upphovsrätt.

 NO – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO OPINION

Is there a need for more clarity as regards the scope of what
needs to be authorised (or not) in digital transmissions?[The
definition of the rights involved in digital transmissions]

The EU framework forthe protection of copyright and related
rights in the digital environment is largely established by
Directive 2001/29/EC16

Directive 2001/29/EC of the European Parliament and of the
Council of 22 May 2001 on the harmonisation of certain aspects
of copyright and related rights in the information society.

on the harmonisation of certain aspects of copyright and related
rights in the information society. OtherEU directives in this
field that are relevant in the online environment are those
relating to the protection of software17

Directive 2009/24/EC of the European Parliament and of the
Council of 23 April 2009 on the legal protection of computer
programs.

and databases18

Directive 96/9/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council
of 11 March 1996 onthe legal protection of databases.

.

Directive 2001/29/ECharmonises the rights of authors and
neighbouring rightholders19

Film and record producers, performers and broadcasters are
holders of so-called “neighbouring rights” in, respectively,
their films,records, performances and broadcast. Authors’
content protected by copyright is referred to as a “work” or
“works”, while content protected by neighbouring rights is
referred to as “other subject matter”.

which are essential for the transmission of digitalcopies of
works (e.g. an e-book) and other protected subject matter (e.g.
a record in a MP3 format) over the internet or similar digital
networks.

The most relevant rights for digital transmissions are the
reproduction right, i.e. the right to authoriseor prohibit the
making of copies20

The right to “authorise or prohibit direct or indirect,
temporary or permanent reproduction by any means and in any
form, in whole or in part” (see Art. 2 of Directive 2001/29/EC)
although temporary acts of reproductionof a transient or
incidental nature are, under certain conditions, excluded (see
art. 5(1) of Directive 2001/29/EC).

, (notably relevant at the start of the transmission – e.g. the
uploading of a digital copy of a work to a server in view of
making it available – and at the users’ end – e.g. when a user
downloads a digital copy of a work) and the communication to
the public/making available right, i.e. the rights to authorise
or prohibit the dissemination of the works in digital networks21

The right to authorise or prohibit any communication to the
public by wire or wireless means and to authorise or prohibit
the making available to the public “on demand” (see Art. 3 of
Directive 2001/29/EC).

. These rights are intrinsically linked in digital
transmissionsand both need to be cleared.

The act of “making available”

Directive 2001/29/EC specifies neitherwhatis covered by the
making available right (e.g. the upload, the accessibility by
the public, the actual reception by the public) norwherethe act
of “making available” takes place. This does not raise questions
if the act is limited to a single territory. Questions arise
however when the transmission covers several territories and
rights need to be cleared (does the act of "making available"
happen in thecountry of the upload only? in each of the
countries where the content is potentially accessible? in each
of the countries where the content is effectively accessed?).
The most recent case law of the Court of Justice of the
European Union (CJEU) suggeststhat a relevant criterion is the
“targeting” of a certain Member State's public22

See in particular Case C-173/11 (Football Dataco vs Sportradar)
and Case C-5/11 (Donner) for copyright and related rights, and
Case C-324/09 (L’Oréal vs eBay) for trademarks. With regard to
jurisdiction see also joined Cases C-585/08 and C-144/09
(Pammer and Hotel Alpenhof) and pending CaseC-441/13 (Pez
Hejduk); see however, adopting a different approach, Case
C-170/12 (Pinckney vs KDG Mediatech).

. According to this approachthe copyright-relevant act (which
has to be licensed) occurs at least in those countries which
are “targeted” by the online service provider. A service
provider “targets” a group of customers residing in a specific
country when it directs its activity to that group, e.g. via
advertisement, promotions, a language or a currency
specifically targeted at that group.

Is the scope of the “making available” right in cross-border
situations – i.e. when content is disseminated across borders –
sufficiently clear?

 YES

 NO – Please explain how this could be clarified and what
type of clarification would be required (e.g. as in "targeting"
approach explained above, as in "country of origin" approach23

The objective of implementing a “country of origin” approach is
to localise the copyright relevant act that must be licenced in
a single Member State (the "country of origin", which could be
for example the Member State in which the content is uploaded
or where the service provider is established), regardless of in
how many Member States the work can be accessed or received.
Such an approach has already been introduced at EU level with
regard to broadcasting by satellite (see Directive 93/83/EEC on
the coordination of certain rules concerning copyright and
rights related to copyright applicable to satellite
broadcasting and cable retransmission).

)

Vi behöver en rättighet att i privat syfte eller utan vinstsyfte
göra saker tillgängliga. Detta skulle legalisera fildelning. Det
finns gott om exempel på att fildelning är bra och produktivt
för samhället, och det visar sig också att just européer är
väldigt bra på att hitta sätt att dela kulturella upplevelser
med varandra. En undersökning från Harvard 2004 visar att
nedladdad musik inte affekterar skivförsäljningen.
(http://www.news.harvard.edu/gazette/2004/04.15/09-filesharing.html
) En undersökning från det EU-finansierade projektet Music
Lessons där bland annat forskare på KTH och Göteborgs
universitet deltagit 2005 visar att musikförsäljningen inte
påverkas negativt – till viss del faktiskt positivt – av
fildelningen.
(http://ec.europa.eu/avpolicy/docs/other_actions/col_2008/ngo/kth_en.pdf
) En undersökning från Göteborgs Universitet 2007 visar att
nedladdad film inte minskar antalet biobesök, utan tvärtom ökar
det
(http://www.som.gu.se/digitalAssets/1275/1275053_2007_morgondagens_publik_2006.pdf
) En undersökning från holländska staten 2009 visar att
piratkopieringen är bra för musikindustrins, och framförallt i
stort för samhällets ekonomi, samt att en nedladdad fil absolut
inte innebär ett förlorat inköp. (
http://www.ez.nl/pv_obj_cache/pv_obj_id_A426D60BC3C67FD783781FB4C9C200AFC2A61000
) En undersökning från norska Handelshögskolan 2009 visar att
folk som laddar ned musik illegalt också är de som köper mest
musik. (http://www.scribd.com/doc/37406039/Thesis-Bjerkoe-Sorbo
) En undersökning från London School of Economics från 2013
visar att hela upphovsrättsindstrin verkar må bra, att man inte
kan säga att piratkopiering orsakar skada och att kampen mot
piratkopiering riskerar att undergräva innovation och
uppfinningsrikedom. (
https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2199058 )
Det svenska projektet Cybernormer har dessutom upprepade gånger
visat att att fildelning och delning av kultur på nätet är
någonting socialt normativt och accepterat.
(http://cybernormer.se/publikationer/ ) Liknande studier har
också gjorts i Polen och visar exakt samma sak
(http://centrumcyfrowe.pl/copyright-law-in-transition-on-social-norms-related-to-content-usage-new-survey-report/
) Enamerikansk forskargrupp kring mediaekonomi har vidare visat
att det är dömt att misslyckas att försöka ändra någonting
socialt accepterat, samt att det har enormt höga kostnader för
samhället ( http://piracy.americanassembly.org/the-report/ ).
Det absolutbästa för hela Europa är om vi som är europeiska
medborgare får göra det vi är bra på, och det vi behöver göra
för att komma överens, nämligen dela kultur, kulturella
upplevelser och uppfinna på det sätt vi vill.

 NO OPINION

[In particular if you area right holder:]Could a clarification
of the territorial scope of the “making available” right have
an effect on the recognition of your rights (e.g. whether you
are considered to be an author or not, whether you are
considered to have transferred your rights or not), on your
remuneration, or on the enforcement of rights (including the
availability of injunctive relief24

Injunctive relief is a temporary or permanent remedy allowing
the right holder to stop or prevent an infringement of his/her
right.

)?

YES – Please explain how such potential effects could be
addressed

Det bästa vore förstås om vi hade en allmän rätt att få göra
saker offentliga om vi är privatpersoner som gäller lika i alla
medlemsländer. Detta är redan uppenbart och skulle gynna
socialinnovation enormt mycket - även ekonomisk innovation.

 NO

 NO OPINION

Two rights involved in a single act of exploitation

Each act of transmission in digital networks entails (in the
current state of technology and law) several reproductions.
This means that there are two rights that apply to digital
transmissions: the reproduction right and the making available
right. This may complicate the licensing of works for online
use notably when the two rights are held by different
persons/entities.

[In particular if you a service provider or a right holder:]Does
the application of two rights to a single act of economic
exploitation in the online environment (e.g. a download) create
problems for you?

 YES – Please explain what type of measures would be needed
in order to address such problems (e.g. facilitation of joint
licences when the rights are in different hands, legislation to
achieve the "bundling of rights")

Vi behöver en upphovsrättsreform och vi behöver ändra lagen på
ett sådant sätt att vi slipperkumulativa rättigheter som skapar
otydlighet, osäkerhet och överdriven fokusering på
avtalsjuristernas arbetsförhållande. Upphovsrätten är till
syvende og sist inte ett verktyg tänkt att gynna
avtalsjuristernas dominans i samhället, utan ett verktyg för
att vi bättre ska kunna få ta del av mer kulturellt material på
rättvisa villkor för de som framställer kulturellt material.

 NO

 NO OPINION

Linking and browsing

Hyperlinks are references to data that lead a user from one
location in the Internet to another. They are indispensable for
the functioning of the Internet as a network. Several cases are
pending before the CJEU25

Cases C-466/12 (Svensson), C-348/13 (Bestwater International)
and C-279/13 (C More entertainment).

in which the question has been raised whether the provision of
a clickable link constitutes an act of communication to the
public/making available to the public subject to the
authorisation ofthe rightholder.

A user browsing the internet (e.g. viewing a web-page) regularly
creates temporary copies of works and other subject-matter
protected under copyright on the screen and in the 'cache'
memory of his computer. A question has been referred tothe
CJEU26

Case C-360/13 (Public Relations Consultants Association Ltd).
See
alsohttp://www.supremecourt.gov.uk/decided-cases/docs/UKSC_2011_0202_PressSummary.pdf.

as to whether such copies are always covered by the mandatory
exception for temporary acts of reproduction provided for in
Article 5(1) of Directive 2001/29/EC.

Should the provision of a hyperlink leading to a work or other
subject matter protected under copyright, either in general or
under specific circumstances, be subject to the authorisation
of the rightholder?

 YES – Please explain whether you consider this to be the
case in general, or under specific circumstances, and why

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO – Please explain whether you consider this to be the case
in general, or under specific circumstances, and why (e.g.
because it does not amount to an act of communication to the
public – or to a new public, or because it should be covered by
a copyright exception)

Att länka till något är hela grundtanken med World Wide Web. Om
man inte tillåter länkning tycker man inte att WWW som idé är
bra - det är galet, för WWW har visat sig vara jättebra och
otroligt användbart för jättemånga i samhället. Att förbjuda
den här aktiviteten på någon nivå alls skulle omöjliggöra
existensen av internet. Kommissionen vill alltså egentligen
veta om internet ska vara lagligt - och eftersom vi troratt
internet är en framtidsteknologi som kan lösa många sociala och
ekonomiska problem vill vi rimligtvis att internet ska vara
lagligt.

 NO OPINION

Should the viewing of a web-page where this implies the
temporary reproduction of a work or other subject matter
protected under copyright on the screen and in the cache memory
of the user’s computer, either in general or under specific
circumstances, be subject to the authorisation of the
rightholder?

 YES – Please explain whether you consider this to be the
case in general, or under specific circumstances, and why

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO – Please explain whether you consider this to be the case
in general, or under specific circumstances, and why(e.g.
because it is or should be covered by a copyright exception)

Det finns vissa fall, som RedTube-fallet i Tyskland
(http://www.techdirt.com/blog/?company=redtube ), där domstolar
håller på och undersöker om det finns en skillnad mellan att
cache'a (temporärt lagra) material i webbläsarens cache,
RAM-minnets cache, osv osv. Det här är inte vettigt och all
internetteknologi är uppbyggd kring att man kan göra temporära
och flyktiga kopior av verk på olika platser, eller mer
permanenta kopior av verk och lägga dem på olika diskar. Om man
gör cachning olagligt kommer det inte längre gå att bygga
teknologi som internetanvändare kan använda, för det är helt
emot hur internet är konstruerat. Det allra bästa är att se
till att det helt enkelt inte är lagligt attköra sådana här
rättsfall.

 NO OPINION

Download to own digital content

Digital content is increasingly being bought via digital
transmission (e.g. download to own). Questions arise as to the
possibility for users to dispose of the files they buy in
thismanner (e.g. by selling them or by giving them as a gift).
The principle of EU exhaustion of the distribution right
applies in the case of the distribution of physical copies
(e.g. when a tangible article such as a CD or a book, etc. is
sold, the right holder cannot prevent the further distribution
of that tangible article)27

See also recital 28 of Directive 2001/29/EC.

. The issue that arises here is whether this principle can also
be applied in the case of an act of transmission equivalent in
its effectto distribution (i.e. where the buyer acquires the
property of the copy)28

In Case C-128/11 (Oracle vs. UsedSoft) the CJEU ruled that an
author cannot oppose the resale of a second-hand licence that
allows downloading his computer program from his websiteand
using it for an unlimited period of time. The exclusive right
of distribution of a copy of a computer program covered by such
a licence is exhausted on its first sale. While it is thus
admitted that the distribution right may be subject to
exhaustionin case of computer programs offered for download
with the right holder’s consent, the Court was careful to
emphasise that it reached this decision based on the Computer
Programs Directive. It was stressed that this exhaustion rule
constituted alex specialisin relation to the Information
Society Directive (UsedSoft, par. 51, 56).

. This raises difficult questions, notably relating to the
practical application of such an approach (how to avoid
re-sellers keeping and using a copy of a work after they
have“re-sold” it – this is often referred to as the “forward
and delete” question) as well as to the economic implications
of the creation of a second-hand market of copies of perfect
quality that never deteriorate (in contrast to the second-hand
market for physical goods).

[In particular if you are an end user/consumer:]Have you faced
restrictions when trying to resell digital files that you have
purchased (e.g. mp3 file, e-book)?

 YES – Please explain by giving examples

Det är svårt att skicka akademiskaartiklar till andra. Det är
också svårt att överföra böcker och textfiler mellan olika
apparater. Medan man utanför nätet kan andrahandsförsälja
musik, film och dataspel kan man inte det på nätet. Moderna
spelkonsoller med helt nedlåsta plattformar gör detomöjligt att
temporärt låna ut spel till kompisar. Det är också svårt, på
grund av kopieringsskydd, att skapa kopior och nya versioner av
gamla spel vilket gör att många dataspel (framför allt) helt går
förlorade för framtida generationer.

 NO

 NO OPINION

[In particular if you are a right holder or a service provider:]
What would be the consequences of providing a legal framework
enabling the resale of previously purchased digital content?
Please specify per market (type of content) concerned.

[Openquestion]

Flera entreprenörer som GOG, Usedsoft, osv skulle kunna skapa
europeiska plattformar för distribution som europeiska
användare faktiskt vill använda. En större och mer aktiv
modscen för spelkonsoller skulle leda till bättre
tillgänglighet och högre innovationstakt i både streaming,
dataspel och tv. Konsumenter bör ha samma rättigheter på
internet som de har utanför internet: det innefattar rätten att
bearbeta, vidaresälja och vidareanvända material dehar köpt. Att
begränsa förekomsten av en andrahandsmarknad gör att man låser
ned innovation och utveckling till ett antal stora aktörer och
förhindrar möjligheterna för europeisk innovation och
utveckling. Det bådar inte så gott för ett Europa där vi ändå
upplever oss vara efter andra marknader i tjänsteutveckling.

Registration of works and other subject matter – is it a good
idea?

Registration is not often discussed in copyright in the EU as
the existing international treaties in the area prohibit
formalities as a condition for the protection and exercise of
rights. However, this prohibition is not absolute29

For example, it does not affect “domestic” works – i.e. works
originating in the country imposing the formalities as opposed
to works originating in another country.

. Moreover a system ofregistration does not need to be made
compulsory or constitute a precondition for the protection and
exercise of rights. With a longer term of protection and with
the increased opportunities that digital technology provides
for the use of content (including older works and works that
otherwise would not have been disseminated), the advantages and
disadvantages of a system of registration are increasingly being
considered30

On the basis of Article 3.6 of the Directive 2012/28/EU of the
European Parliament and of the Council of 25 October 2012 on
certain permitted uses of orphan works, a publicly accessible
online database is currently being set up by the Office for
Harmonisation of the Internal Market (OHIM) for the
registration of orphan works.

.

Would the creation of a registration system at EU level help in
the identification and licensing of works and other subject
matter?

 YES

 NO

 NO OPINION

What would be the possible advantages of such a system?

[Open question]

Registrering av verk gör detmycket lättare att förstå hur och
när man får använda eller återanvända material. Det gör det
också lättare att hålla reda på material som är skyddat och vi
får bättre möjligheter också att realisera
digitaliseringsprojekt av äldre material. Det blir juridiskt
säkrare för alla i det digitala samhället - för de som har
upphovsrätter, för de som vill andra upphovsrättsskyddade verk
i kommersiellt eller icke-kommersiellt syfte, för de som vill
uppfinna nya distributionskanaler och tjänster, för dem som
vill tillgängliggöra äldre verk och för dem som tillgängliggöra
nya verk. Allt blir bättre helt enkelt!

What would be the possible disadvantages of such a system?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Whatincentives for registration by rightholders could be
envisaged?

[Open question]

Det borde vara omöjligt att vidta stämningsåtgärder eller andra
upprätthållandeåtgärder utan att först ha registrerat. Dessutom
borde inte insamlingssällskap få vidta åtgärderkring rättigheter
som inte är registrerade alls.

How to improve the use and interoperability of identifiers

There are many private databases of works and other subject
matter held by producers, collective management organisations,
and institutions suchas libraries, which are based to a greater
or lesser extent on the use of (more or less) interoperable,
internationally agreed ‘identifiers’. Identifiers can be
compared to a reference number embedded in a work, are specific
to the sector in which they have been developed31

E.g. the International Standard Recording Code (ISRC) is used to
identify recordings, the International Standard Book Number
(ISBN) is used to identify books.

, and identify, variously, the work itself, the owner or the
contributor to awork or other subject matter. There are notable
examples of where industry is undertaking actions to improve the
interoperability of such identifiers and databases. The Global
Repertoire Database32

You will find more information about this initiative on the
following website:http://www.globalrepertoiredatabase.com/.

should, once operational, provide a single source of information
on the ownership and control of musical works worldwide. The
Linked Content Coalition33

You will find more information about this initiative (funded in
part by the European Commission) on the following website:
www.linkedcontentcoalition.org.

was established to develop building blocks for the expression
and management of rights and licensing across all content and
media types. It includes the development of a Rights Reference
Model (RRM) – a comprehensive data model for all types of
rights in all types of content. The UK Copyright Hub34

You will find more information aboutthis initiative on the
following website:http://www.copyrighthub.co.uk/.

is seeking to take such identification systems a step further,
and to create a linked platform, enabling automated licensing
acrossdifferent sectors.

What should be the role of the EU in promoting the adoption
of identifiers in the content sector, and in promoting the
development and interoperability of rights ownership and
permissions databases?

[Open question]

EU behöver inte ägnasig åt tekniska lösningsmodeller alls, utan
bör i första hand ägna sig åt att se till att det över huvud
taget går att få en fungerande marknad och miljö för social
innovation. Däremot är det väldigt viktigt att alla tekniska
lösningar som sedan anpassas till den marknad som kan uppstå
när kommissionen väl ändrat upphovsrätten inte börjar begränsa
användarnas juridiska och mänskliga rättigheter (precis som
Europakommissionen själva klokt konstaterar i sin kommunikation
om internets styre:
http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=COM:2014:0072:FIN:EN:PDF
)

Term of protection – is it appropriate?

Works and other subject matter are protected under copyright for
a limited period of time. After the term of protection has
expired, a work falls intothe public domain and can be
freelyused by anyone (in accordance with the applicable
national rules on moral rights). The Berne Convention35

Berne Convention for the Protection of Literary and Artistic
Works,http://www.wipo.int/treaties/en/ip/berne/.

requires a minimum term of protection of 50 years after the
death of the author. The EU rules extend this term of
protection to 70 years after the death ofthe author (as do many
other countries, e.g. the US).

With regard to performers in the music sector and phonogram
producers, the term provided for in the EU rules also extend 20
years beyond what is mandated in international agreements,
providing for a term of protection of 70 years after the first
publication. Performers and producers in the audio-visual
sector, however, do not benefit from such an extended term of
protection.

Are the current terms of copyright protection still appropriate
in the digital environment?

 YES – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO – Please explain if they should be longer or shorter

Upphovsrätten måste kortas. Alla ekonomiska akademiska studier
pekar åt att en rimligare period är runt 15-20 år. Se t ex
Pollock
(http://rufuspollock.org/papers/optimal_copyright_term.pdf )
eller Engström/Falkvinge (http://www.copyrightreform.eu/ ).
Också tidigare utredningar som utförts på beställning av
EU-kommissionen har visat attlånga skyddstider är onödiga och
till och med dåliga för Europa
(http://www.ivir.nl/publications/helberger/EIPR_2008_5.pdf ) (
Gowers Review of Intellectual Property:
http://www.official-documents.gov.uk/document/other/0118404830/0118404830.pdf
) Det är dags att EU-kommissionen faktiskt tar lite av den
expertis som finns i Europa om upphovsrätt på allvar när man
driver politik. Vi behöver kortare skyddstider för alla olika
rättigheter som rör konstnärligt material - för upphovsrätten
och alla näraliggande upphovsrätter.

 NO OPINION

Limitations and exceptions in the Single Market

Limitations and exceptions to copyright and related rights
enable the use of works and other protected subject-matter,
without obtaining authorisation from the rightholders,
forcertain purposes and to a certain extent (for instance the
use for illustration purposes of an extract from a novel by a
teacher in a literature class). At EU level they are
established in a number of copyright directives, most notably
Directive 2001/29/EC36

Plus Directive 96/9/ECon the legal protection of
databases;Directive 2009/24/ECon the legal protection of
computer programs,and Directive 92/100/ECon rental right and
lending right.

.

Exceptions and limitations in the national and EU copyright laws
have to respect international law37

Article 9(2) of the Berne Convention for the Protection of
Literary and Artistic Works (1971); Article 13 of the TRIPS
Agreement (Trade Related Intellectual Property Rights) 1994;
Article 16(2) of the WIPO Performersand Phonograms Treaty
(1996); Article 9(2) of the WIPO Copyright Treaty (1996).

. In accordance with international obligations, the EU acquis
requires that limitations and exceptions can only be applied in
certain special cases which do not conflict with
anormalexploitation of the work or other subject matter and do
not unreasonably prejudice the legitimate interest of the
rightholders.

Whereas the catalogue of limitations and exceptions included in
EU law is exhaustive (no other exceptions can be applied to the
rights harmonised at EU level)38

Other than the grandfathering of the exceptions of minor
importance for analogue uses existing in Member States at the
time of adoption of Directive 2001/29/EC (see, Art. 5(3)(o)).

, these limitations and exceptions are often optional39

With the exception of certain limitations: (i) in the Computer
Programs Directive, (ii) in the Database Directive, (iii)
Article 5(1) in the Directive 2001/29/EC and (iv) the Orphan
Works Directive.

, in the sense that Member Statesare free to reflect in national
legislation as many or as few of them as they wish. Moreover,
the formulation of certain of the limitations and exceptions is
general enough to give significant flexibility to the Member
States as to how, and to what extent,to implement them (if they
decide to do so). Finally, it is worth noting that not all of
the limitations and exceptions included in the EU legal
framework for copyright are of equivalent significance in
policy terms and in terms of their potential effecton the
functioning of the Single Market.

In addition, in the same manner that the definition of the
rights is territorial (i.e. has an effect only within the
territory of the Member State), the definition of the
limitations and exceptions to the rights isterritorial too (so
an act that is covered by an exception in a Member State "A"
may still require the authorisation of the rightholder once we
move to the Member State "B")40

Only the exception established in the recent Orphan Works
Directive (a mandatory exception to copyright and related
rights in the case where the rightholders are not known or
cannot be located) has been given a cross-border effect, which
means that, for instance, once a literary work – for instance a
novel – is considered an orphanwork in a Member State, that same
novel shall be considered an orphan work in all Member States
and can be used and accessed in all Member States.

.

The cross-border effect of limitations and exceptions also
raises the question of fair compensation of rightholders. In
some instances, Member States are obliged to compensate
rightholders for the harm inflicted on them by a limitation or
exception to their rights. In other instances Member States are
not obliged, but may decide, to provide for such compensation.
If a limitation or exception triggering a mechanism of fair
compensation were to be given cross-border effect (e.g. the
books are used for illustration in an online course given by an
university in a Member State "A" and the students are in a
Member State "B") then there would also be a need to clarify
which national law should determine the level of that
compensation and who should pay it.

Finally, the question of flexibility and adaptability is being
raised: what is the best mechanism to ensure that the EU and
Member States’ regulatory frameworks adapt when necessary
(either to clarify that certain uses are covered by an
exception or to confirm that for certain uses the authorisation
of rightholders is required)? The main question here is whether
a greater degree of flexibility can be introduced in the EU and
Member States regulatory framework while ensuring the required
legal certainty, including for the functioning of the Single
Market, and respecting the EU's international obligations.

Are there problems arising from the fact that most limitations
and exceptions provided in the EU copyright directives are
optional for the Member States?

 YES – Please explain by referring to specific cases

Den juridiska osäkerheten kring alla undantag ochbegränsningar
är enorm. Man vet inte hur eller när och under vilka
omständigheter man får göra privata kopior, man vet inte hur
man får remixa, man vet inte om det man gör i ett medlemsland
är lagligt och i ett annat kriminellt.Nya horder av
rättigheter mot till exempel indexering gör att det blir svårt
att veta hur man får skapa webbportaler, samlingssidor,
RSS-flöden. Tyskland har redan en
anti-indexerings-upphovsrätt. Spanien håller på att få en
anti-indexerings-upphovsrätt. Man vet inte vem man får
samarbeta med för att driva hemsidor - i vissa medlemsländer
kan hemsidor spontant blockeras eller avblockeras beroende på
olika domstolars olika viljor, och i andra är det bara en
anonym administrativ funktionär som när som helst får bestämma
att ens egen hemsida eller någon man driver hemsidan med är
oönskat element. Det skapar rättslig osäkerhet för bibliotek
som inte får tillgängliggöra sitt material över gränserna.
Public broadcasters (TV och radio) får inte visa eller göra
tillgängliga sina arkiv i andramedlemsländer. I många
medlemsländer har studenter försökt göra material mer
tillgängligt för sina studiekamrater eller andra studenter i
andra länder, och istället fått hot om stämningar eller till
och med hot om fängelse från ivriga jurister (jfr StudentBay i
Sverige, eller universitetsarkiv i Tjeckien). Man har stängt
ned kopieringsbutiker som tidigare gjorde det möjligt att vara
småföretagare nära universitet som hjälpte bibliotek och
studenter att ha en mer lärorik upplevelse (detta hände i
Sverige efter implementationen av InfoSoc-direktivet 2005 i
nationell lag: plötsligt hotade en mängd kopieringsbutiker i
universitetsstäderna vilket ledde till en sämre miljö för alla
studenter, samt bibliotekarierna). Organisationer som försöker
sätta upp trådlösanätverk och bygga nyttig infrastruktur i sin
lokal miljö lyckas inte med detta utan fastnar istället på
juridisk osäkerhet och allmänt tvivel. Vid flera tillfällen har
jag fått frågor om hur man hanterar sån osäkerhet men det
uppenbara svaret är att vi behöver en bättre lagstiftning. Det
kan inte ligga i enlighet med den europeiska ambitionen att man
ska vara rädd, förtvivlad och olycklig för att man eventuellt
blir kriminell så fort man rör sig över en gräns. Det borde
dessutom vara enkelt och möjligt föreuropeiska medborgare att
faktiskt hålla normal kontakt med europeiska kamrater i andra
länder - särskilt över internet som är ett så bra
kommunikationsverktyg!

 NO – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO OPINION

Should some/all of the exceptions be made mandatory and, if so,
is there a need for a higher level of harmonisation of such
exceptions?

 YES – Please explain by referring to specific cases

Alla undantag och begränsningar bör vara obligatoriska för alla
medlemsländer. Man bör dessutom försöka införa en allmän
hållning att undantag och begränsningar ska tolkas frikostigt
så att den juridiska säkerheten blir högre. Idag tolkas
undantagen oftast snävt, ochdet skapar en enorm osäkerhet för
användare av kulturella verk. Rättighetsinnehavarna har /all/
säkerhet, och användaren har /ingen/ säkerhet. Dessutom ska
EU-rätten harmonisera villkoren på den inre marknaden. Enligt
enkla beräkningar på InfoSoc-direktivets artikel 5-undantag
finns istället fyra biljoner möjliga kombinationer av
undantagen
(http://www.smarimccarthy.is/2011/08/copyright-combinatorics/
). Detta är absolut ingen harmonisering.

 NO – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO OPINION

Should any new limitations and exceptions be added to or removed
from the existing catalogue?Please explain by referring to
specific cases.

[Open question]

Det vore inte bra att ta bort undantag och begränsningar. Det
som behövs är istället: - att alla undantag och begränsningar
ska kunnas tolkas flexiblare och att man i regel ska tolka
undantag och begränsningar i frikostig bemärkelse (det vill
säga man bör införa en regel som gör det till praxis att tolka
vitt istället för snävt). - man bör införa ett extra undantag
för privatpersoner som vill göra verk offentliga efter att de
offentliggjorts officiellt för att göra det möjligt med
fildelning och kulturdelning på nätet. Detta skulle gynna
innovation på p2p-teknologier (där Europa ändå har ett
försprång gentemot andra geografiska territorier) och också
vara mer i linje med hur användare faktiskt vill bruka
material. - dessutom bör man införa ett extra undantag som gör
det möjligt att tolka alla de andra "analogt". Det är ett
välstuderat problem att fildelning inte är lagligt (se svaren
till fråga 8 t ex, där det verkar finnas överväldigande stöd
för att göra fildelning lagligt. Se också svaren till fråga 80
där det påvisas att man i just Europa och EU är extra bra på den
typen av innovation som fildelning gynnar). Det är också inte
okänt att den nuvarande bristen på flexibilitet skapar problem
för domstolar som måste hitta "nödlösningar" runt
upphovsrättslagen för att inte helt förstöra internet.

Independently from the questions above, is there a need to
provide for a greater degree of flexibility in the EU
regulatory framework for limitations and exceptions?

 YES – Please explain why

Osäkerheten kring den nuvarande lagstiftning är för stor. Vi
behöver bättre flexibilitet. Det går inte heller att avgöra om
man utsätter andra för risker genom att inte veta specifikt vad
man får och inte får göra: t ex kanske någon som underhåller
ett nätforum får jättestora problem med både polisen och
upphovsrättsinnehavare av att jag gör "fel" i ett medlemsland
jag inte kan upphovsrättspraxis i tillräckligt bra. Särskilt
osäkerheten i privatkopieringsundantaget har också gjort att
jag hamnat i situationer där vänner till mig blir oroliga för
att använda internet hemma hos mig, eller låta mig använda
offentliga accesspunkter för trådlösa nätverk, utifall att det
ger mig eller nätägaren juridiska problem. Det här problemet
har jag haft i flera medlemsländer, och jag har bott i fyra
medlemsländer.

 NO – Please explain why

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO OPINION

If yes, what would be the best approach to provide for
flexibility? (e.g. interpretation by national courts and the
ECJ, periodic revisions of the directives,interpretations by
the Commission, built-in flexibility, e.g. in the form of a
fair-use or fair dealing provision / open norm, etc.)? Please
explain indicating what would be the relative advantages and
disadvantages of such an approach as well as its possible
effects on the functioning of the Internal Market.

[Open question]

Alla nuvarande undantag bör göras obligatoriska. Kommissionen
måste sluta försöka övertyga sig om att detta vore på tok för
radikalt - de borde istället fundera på hur de ska skapa
juridisk säkerhet för företag och privatpersoner i Europa och
bli av med de fyra biljoner kombinationers undantag som
medborgare i EU idag drabbas av.

Does the territoriality of limitations and exceptions, in your
experience, constitute a problem?

 YES – Please explain why and specify which exceptions you
are referring to

Jag och många jag har umgåtts med genom åren i flertalet
europeiska jurisdiktioner upplever en stor osäkerhet. Antingen
löser man det genom att helt skita i lagstiftning ("det spelar
ändåingen roll för man kan inte veta"), eller genom att oroa
sig eller genom att bli arg. Det absolut vanligaste är att man
helt enkelt inte bryr sig om lagen. Och då fungerar inte lagen
- den behöver anpassas så att människor känner att de faktiskt
kan respektera lagen. Vi behöver en ny upphovsrättslag som
tillåter människor att göra så som de upplever vara rätt,
nämligen att dela med sig, remixa och tillgängliggöra material
i högre utsträckning. Kommissionens problemformulering är därför
konstig: det finns inget specifikt att referera till eftersom
erfarenheten visar att medborgare struntar helt i all
lagstiftning för att den är för icke-intuitiv.

 NO – Please explain why and specify which exceptions you are
referring to

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO OPINION

In the event that limitations and exceptions established at
national level were to have cross-border effect, how should the
question of “fair compensation” be addressed, when such
compensation is part ofthe exception? (e.g. who pays whom,
where?)

[Open question]

Precis som återgavs i fråga 8 finns det många studier som visar
att det inte behövs någon "rättvis ersättning", eftersom det
inte går att påvisa någon direkt eller indirekt skada av att
man harflexibilitet i upphovsrättssystemet. Däremot finns det
jättemånga studier som visar att upphovsrättslagen är helt fel
ute gentemot medborgarnas allmänna moraliska uppfattning och
vilja, att de inte trivs med upphovsrättslagarna och att de
konsekvent struntar i att ens försöka efterleva dem. Omnämnande
av rättvis ersättning bör helt plockas bort ur undantagen och
begränsningarna. Istället bör de kulturella och kreativa
industrierna ägna mer tankekraft åt att tänka ut nya
affärsmodeller, och mindre tankekraft åt att stämma
kulturanvändare.

Access to content in libraries and archives

Directive 2001/29/EC enables Member States to reflect in their
national law a range of limitations and exceptions for the
benefit of publicly accessible libraries, educational
establishments and museums, as well as archives. If
implemented, these exceptions allow acts of preservation and
archiving41

Article 5(2)c of Directive 2001/29.

and enable on-site consultation of the works and other subject
matter in the collections of suchinstitutions42

Article 5(3)n of Directive 2001/29.

. The public lending (under an exception or limitation) by these
establishments of physical copies of works and other subject
matter is governed by the Rental and Lending Directive43

Article 5 of Directive 2006/115/EC.

.

Questions arise as to whether the current framework continues to
achieve the objectives envisaged or whether it needs to be
clarified or updated to cover use in digital networks. At the
same time, questions arise as to the effect of sucha possible
expansion on the normal exploitation of works and other subject
matter and as to the prejudice this may cause to rightholders.
The role of licensing and possible framework agreements between
different stakeholders also needs to be considered here.

Preservation and archiving

The preservation of the copies of works or other subject-matter
held in the collections of cultural establishments (e.g. books,
records, or films) – the restoration or replacement of works,
the copying of fragile works - mayinvolve the creation of
another copy/ies of these works or other subject matter. Most
Member States provide for an exception in their national laws
allowing for the making of such preservation copies. The scope
of the exception differs from Member State toMember State (as
regards the type of beneficiary establishments, the types of
works/subject-matter covered by the exception, the mode of
copying and the number of reproductions that a beneficiary
establishment may make). Also, the current legal status ofnew
types of preservation activities (e.g. harvesting and archiving
publicly available web content) is often uncertain.

(a)[In particular if you are an institutional user:]Have you
experienced specific problems when trying to use an exception
to preserveand archive specific works or other subject matter
in your collection?

(b)[In particular if you are a right holder:]Have you
experienced problems with the use by libraries, educational
establishments, museum or archives of the preservation
exception?

YES – Please explain, by Member State, sector, and the type
of use in question.

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO

 NO OPINION

If there are problems, how would they best be solved?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

If your view is that a legislative solution is needed, what
would be its main elements? Which activities of the beneficiary
institutions should be covered and under whichconditions?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

If your view is that a different solution is needed, what would
it be?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Off-premises access to library collections

Directive 2001/29/EC provides an exception for the consultation
of works and other subject-matter (consulting an e-book,
watching a documentary) via dedicated terminals on thepremises
of such establishments for the purpose of research and private
study. The online consultation of works and other
subject-matter remotely (i.e. when the library user is not on
the premises of the library) requires authorisation and is
generally addressed in agreements between
universities/libraries and publishers. Some argue that the law
rather than agreements should provide for the possibility to,
and the conditions for, granting online access to collections.

(a)[In particular if you are an institutional user:]Have you
experienced specific problems when trying to negotiate
agreements with rights holders that enable you to provide
remote access, including across borders, to your collections
(or parts thereof) for purposes of research and privatestudy?

(b)[In particular if you are an end user/consumer:]Have you
experienced specific problems when trying to consult, including
across borders, works and other subject-matter held in the
collections of institutions such as universities and
nationallibraries when you are not on the premises of the
institutions in question?

(c)[In particular if you are aright holder:]Have you negotiated
agreements with institutional users that enable those
institutions to provide remote access, including across
borders, to the works or other subject-matter in their
collections, for purposes of research and private study?

[Open question]

Det finns en massa problem med bibliotek och arkiv: - Det är
svårt att få tag på textmaterial som dagstidningar, akademiska
artiklar, böcker, konstverk, osv när de inte är i kommersiell
cirkulation. - En hel generation dataspel från 1980-talet
håller på att dö arkivdöden, eftersom man inte får återskapa
dem eller arkivera dem. Det är en hel tidig kulturvåg som går
till spillo. - På flera universitet i Sverige har lärosätena
egenmäktig börjat digitalisera studenternas material utan
studenternas föregående godkännande, så rättigheterna
respekteras inte förutsattatt motparten i förhandlingarna
(studenterna i det här fallet) är tillräckligt svaga. - British
National Library lyckades tydligen schabbla bort stora
kulturskatter till dåliga upphovsrättskontrakt i början av
2000-talet. - Videoarkiv och ljudarkiv finns knappt
tillgängliga i Europa alls trots att ljud och bild är bra sätt
att stödja kulturell utveckling. Jag har personligen haft
problem med: - universitetsdatabaser (sverige, belgien)-
rättsdatabaser (nederländerna, storbritannien, sverige) -
ljud- och filmarkiv (tyskland, sverige, rumänien, belgien,
nederländerna)

If there are problems, how would they best be solved?

[Open question]

Fixa undantag och begränsningar i upphovsrättenså att man
faktiskt kan digitalisera och tillgängliggöra utan att bli
stämningsoffer! Se också till att den tekniska infrastrukturen
inte börjar begränsa användarnas juridiska rättigheter. Teknik
ska hjälpa oss bli ett bättre samhälle, inte frånta oss de
rättigheter vi har.

If your view is that a legislative solution is needed, what
would be its main elements? Which activities of the beneficiary
institutions should be covered and under which conditions?

[Open question]

Vi behöver en juridisk lösning genomändrad upphovsrättslag som
sedan faktiskt går att efterleva i industrin och på den
tekniska nivån. Vill man öka möjligheterna att skapa fler
innovationer kring bibliotek och arkiv bör man också tillåta
kommersiellt användande. Vi behöver också så till attljudverk,
mjukvarukod och audiovisuella verk samt bilder och fotografier
täcks av sådana undantag,

If your view is that a different solution is needed, what would
it be?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

E – lending

Traditionally, public libraries have loaned physical copies of
works (i.e. books, sometimes also CDs and DVDs) to their users.
Recent technological developments have made it technically
possible for libraries to provide users with temporary access
to digital content, such as e-books, music or films via
networks. Under the current legal framework, libraries need to
obtain the authorisation of the rights holders to organise such
e-lending activities. In various Member States, publishers and
libraries are currently experimenting with different business
models for the making available of works online, including
direct supply of e-books to libraries by publishers or bundling
by aggregators.

(a)[In particular if you are alibrary:]Have youexperienced
specific problems when trying to negotiate agreements to enable
the electronic lending (e-lending), including across borders, of
books or other materials held in your collection?

(b)[In particular if you are an end user/consumer:]Have you
experienced specific problems when trying to borrow books or
other materials electronically (e-lending), including across
borders, from institutions such as public libraries?

(c)[In particular if you are aright holder:]Have you negotiated
agreements with libraries to enable them to lend books or other
materials electronically, including across borders?

 YES – Please explain with specific examples

E-böcker finns knappt tillgängliga för universitetsstudenter.
Även när de finns tillgängliga är det problem med
interoperabilitet bland formaten. Dessutom lyckas unionen inte
skapa "digital läsro" - det vill säga vi låter alla möjliga
steg i värdekedjan kartlägga, spionera och spåra hur läsarna
tillgodogör sig materialet. För att få en bra miljö för
e-läsning behöver vi nog se till att man kan använda e-böcker
på ett bra sätt, som inte kränker individens rättigheter i
någon bemärkelse (privatliv, integritet, rätten att ta del av
kultur och få lära sig saker).

 NO

 NO OPINION

If there are problems,how would they best be solved?

[Open question]

Vi behöver en samtidigt lagändring och uppstyrande av tekniska
standarder: - interoperabilitet bland formaten för e-böcker; -
säkerställande om att kartläggande och spårning inte sker via
de tekniska lösningar användarna brukar för att läsa
(privatliv); - biblioteken måste få bruka e-böcker på samma
sätt som de brukar fysiska böcker. De pågående debatterna mot
bibliotek av upphovsrättsinnehavare är helt absurda.
Lagstiftaren och framför allt kommissionen måste verka hårdare
mot att rättighetsinnehavare missbrukar sin totalt dominerande
ställning.

The following two questions are relevant both to this point (n°
3) and the previous one (n° 2).

[In particular if you are an institutional user:]What
differences do you see in the management of physical and online
collections, including providing access to your subscribers?
What problems have you encountered?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

[In particular if you are a right holder:]What difference do you
see between libraries’ traditional activities such as
on-premises consultation or public lending and activities such
as off-premises (online, at a distance) consultation and
e-lending? What problems have you encountered?

[Open question]

Det är mycket enklare att komma åt material på internet och i
digitalt format från bibliotek, även i andra länder.
Gränsöverskridande kulturutbyte blir mycket enklare på nätet
och det är en stor skillnad gentemot fysiska bibliotek.

Mass digitisation

The term “mass digitisation” is normally used to refer to
efforts by institutions such as libraries and archives to
digitise (e.g. scan) the entire content or part of their
collections with an objective to preserve these collections
and, normally, to makethem available to the public. Examples
are efforts by libraries to digitise novels form the early part
of the 20thcentury or whole collections of pictures of
historical value. This matter has been partly addressed at the
EU level by the 2011 Memorandumof Understanding (MoU) on key
principles on the digitisation and making available of out
of commerce works (i.e. works which are no longer found in the
normal channels of commerce), which is aiming to facilitate mass
digitisation efforts (for books and learned journals) on the
basis of licence agreements between libraries and similar
cultural institutions on the one hand and the collecting
societies representing authors and publishers on the other44

You will find more information about his MoU on the following
website:http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/copyright/out-of-commerce/index_en.htm.

. Provided the required funding is ensured (digitisation
projects are extremely expensive), the result of this MoU
should be that books that are currently to be found only in the
archives of, for instance, libraries will be digitised and made
available online to everyone. The MoU is based on voluntary
licences (granted by Collective Management Organisations on the
basis of the mandates they receive from authors and publishers).
Some Member States may need to enact legislation to ensure the
largest possible effect of such licences (e.g. by establishing
in legislation a presumption of representation of a collecting
society or the recognition of an “extended effect” to the
licences granted)45

France and Germany have already adopted legislation to back the
effects of the MoU.The French act (LOI n° 2012-287 du 1er mars
2012 relativeà l'exploitation numérique des livres
indisponibles du xxe siècle) foresees collective management,
unless the author or publisher in question opposes such
management.The German act (Gesetz zur Nutzung verwaister und
vergriffener Werke und einer weiterenÄnderung des
Urheberrechtsgesetzes vom 1.Oktober 2013) contains a legal
presumption of representation by a collecting society in
relation to works whose rightholders are not members of the
collecting society.

.

[In particular if you are an institutionaluser,engaging or
wanting to engage in mass digitisation projects, a right
holder, a collective management organisation:]Would it be
necessary in your country to enact legislation to ensure that
the results of the 2011 MoU (i.e. the agreements concluded
between libraries and collecting societies) have a cross-border
effect so that out of commerce works can be accessed across the
EU?

 YES – Please explain why and how it could best be achieved

Vi behöver lagändring, och MoU:n är knappast bäst väg framåt.
Inte ens kommissionens egna utredningar om upphovsrätten lyckas
stödja att MoU:n på något sätt uppmuntrat
massdigitaliseringsprojekt. Den är skriven på fel sätt, den är
för svag, den åstadkommer för lite. Vi behöver någonting
större, bättre och mer reformativt - i enlighet med de andra
svaren givna på den här konsultationen av mig :-)

 NO – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO OPINION

Would it be necessary to develop mechanisms, beyond thosealready
agreed for other types of content (e.g. for audio- or
audio-visual collections, broadcasters’ archives)?

 YES – Please explain

Alla undantag och begränsningar som tidigare diskuterats i fråga
22-26, samt fråga 40, bör göras gällande även för ljudverk och
audiovisuella verk samt för visuella verk. Vi behöver göra det
enklare, bättre och smidigare att bygga vidare på kultur och
distribuera kultur genom en gedigen upphovsrättsreform!

 NO – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO OPINION

Teaching

Directive 2001/29/EC46

Article 5(3)a of Directive 2001/29.

enables Member States to implement in their national legislation
limitations and exceptions for the purpose of illustration for
non-commercialteaching. Such exceptions would typically allow a
teacher to use parts of or full works to illustrate his course,
e.g. by distributing copies of fragments of a book or of
newspaper articles in the classroom or by showing protected
content on a smart boardwithout having to obtain authorisation
from the right holders. The open formulation of this (optional)
provision allows for rather different implementation at Member
States level. The implementation of the exception differs from
Member State to Member State, with several Member States
providing instead a framework for the licensing of content for
certain educational uses. Some argue that the law should
provide for better possibilities for distance learning and
study at home.

(a)[In particular if you arean end user/consumer or an
institutional user:]Have you experienced specific problems when
trying to use works or other subject-matter for illustration for
teaching, including across borders?

(b)[In particular if you are a right holder:]Have you
experienced specific problems resulting from the way in which
works or other subject-matter are used for illustration for
teaching, including across borders?

 YES – Please explain

Lärare verkar närmast rutinmässigt bryta mot upphovsrätten och
erkänner det föreleverna. De har svårigheter att visa filmer
som del av språkundervisningen, de får inte kopiera upp
enskilda kapitel ur läroböcker för att exemplifiera specifika
saker, och undervisningen verkar i regel ta hård stryk av att
lärarna tvingas in i en situation där de varken får kopiera
eller kan låta bli. Resultatet blir att hela skolan istället
lär ut en strukturell brist på respekt för en lagstiftning vi
upplever som enormt ekonomiskt viktig. Det vore bättre om
lagstiftningen varsådan att den var mer överensstämmande med
hur lärare, elever och människor i allmänhet faktiskt vill
hantera kulturellt material - nämligen att dela med sig.

 NO

 NO OPINION

If there are problems, how would they best be solved?

[Open question]

Vi behöver en ändring avupphovsrättslagen. Audiovisuella verk,
dataspel, ljud och fotografier bör täckas av undantag och
begränsningar till fördel för undervisning. Man bör också göra
det tydligare att lärarundantag och undervisningsundantag
faktiskt bör vara upp till lärarna - istället för att utgå
ifrån att undervisningen är upphovsrättens fiende bör man se
kulturella verk som en viktig, långsiktig hörnsten i
utbildningen av framtidens framgångsrika européer.

What mechanisms exist in the market place to facilitate the use
of content for illustration for teaching purposes? How
successful are they?

[Open question]

Inga, så vitt jag vet. De flesta lärare jag pratat med har
istället sagt att de är ovilliga att ta upp problem med
upphovsrätten för att de är rädda för att lagen faktiskt ska
börja efterlevas. Deras arbetssituation skulle då bli helt
outhärdlig, tydligen.

If your view is that a legislative solution is needed, what
would be its main elements? Which activities of the beneficiary
institutions should be covered and underwhat conditions?

[Open question]

Vi behöver tydligare undantagsformuleringar. Lärare och
studenter bör kunna - använda alla typer av verk i undervisning
på det sätt de själva upplever behövs för att de ska uppnå målet
med undervisningen (det ska inte varaupp till
rättighetsinnehavaren att begränsa). - justera alla typer av
verk på ett sådant sätt att det blir enklare att använda i
undervisningen. - det borde inte vara nödvändigt med en
särskild undervisningslicens för verken som ska användas i
undervisningen eftersom det bara skapar ekonomiska problem för
lärarna och skolorna/lärosätena.

If your view is that a different solution is needed, what would
it be?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Research

Directive 2001/29/EC47

Article 5(3)a of Directive 2001/29.

enables Member States to choose whether to implement in their
national laws a limitation for the purpose of non-commercial
scientific research. The open formulation of this (optional)
provision allows for rather different implementations at Member
States level.

(a)[In particular if you are an end user/consumer or an
institutional user:]Have you experienced specific problems when
trying to use works or other subject matter in the contextof
research projects/activities, including across borders?

(b)[In particular if you are a right holder:]Have you
experienced specific problems resulting from the way in which
works or other subject-matter are used in the context of
researchprojects/activities, including across borders?

 YES – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO

 NO OPINION

If there are problems, how would they best be solved?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

What mechanisms exist in the Member States to facilitate the use
of content for research purposes? How successful are they?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Disabilities

Directive 2001/29/EC48

Article 5 (3)b of Directive 2001/29.

provides for an exception/limitation for the benefit of people
with a disability. The open formulation of this (optional)
provision allows for rather different implementations at Member
States level. At EU and international level projects have been
launched to increase the accessibility of works and other
subject-matter for persons withdisabilities (notably by
increasing the number of works published in special formats and
facilitating their distribution across the European Union)49

The European TrustedIntermediaries Network (ETIN) resulting from
a Memorandum of Understanding between representatives of the
right-holder community (publishers, authors, collecting
societies) and interested parties such as associations for
blind and dyslexic persons
(http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/copyright/initiatives/access/index_en.htm)
and the Trusted Intermediary Global Accessible Resources (TIGAR)
project in WIPO (http://www.visionip.org/portal/en/).

.

The Marrakesh Treaty50

Marrakesh Treaty to Facilitate Access to Published Works by
Visually Impaired Persons and Persons with Print Disabilities,
Marrakesh, June 17 to 282013.

has been adopted to facilitate access to published works for
persons who are blind, visually impaired, or otherwise print
disabled. The Treaty creates a mandatory exception to copyright
that allows organisations for the blind to produce,
distributeand make available accessible format copies to
visually impaired persons without the authorisation of the
rightholders. The EU and its Member States have started work to
sign and ratify the Treaty. This may require the adoption of
certain provisions at EUlevel (e.g. to ensure the possibility
to exchange accessible format copies across borders).

(a)[In particular if you are a person with a disability or an
organisation representing persons with disabilities:]Have you
experienced problems with accessibility to content, including
across borders, arising from Member States’ implementation of
this exception?

(b)[In particular if you are an organisation providing services
for persons with disabilities:]Have you experienced problems
when distributing/communicating works published in special
formats across the EU?

(c)[In particular if you are a right holder:]Have you
experienced specific problems resulting from the application of
limitations or exceptions allowing for the
distribution/communication of workspublished in special
formats, including across borders?

 YES – Please explain by giving examples

Det är svårt att - framställa material för synskadade och
hörselskadade vilket skapar problem för äldre, i undervisning.
Detta har uppmärksammats av mångaolika personer men jag har
också personligen varit i kontakt med människor som antingen
vill framställa material åt synskadade och hörselskadade men
inte vet om de får (mest små projekt i olika medlemsländer)
eller personer som själva är hörsel- eller synskadade men inte
har tillgång till läsmaterial på ett bra sätt (mestadels äldre
personer som fått nedsatt syn eller hörsel med åldern).

 NO

 NO OPINION

If there are problems, what could be done to improve
accessibility?

[Open question]

Omedelbar ratificering och adoptering av WIPO:s Marrakesh-avtal
från 2012 skulle vara helt och hållet bra! Man bör också göra
alla undantag och begränsningar obligatoriska och se särskilt
till att det fungerar att föra anpassade material över
nationsgränserna i Europa utan problem.

What mechanisms exist in the market place to facilitate
accessibility to content? How successful are they?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Text and data mining

Text and datamining/content mining/data analytics51

For the purpose of the present document, the term “text and data
mining” will be used.

are different terms used to describe increasingly important
techniques used in particular by researchers for the
exploration ofvast amounts of existing texts and data (e.g.,
journals, web sites, databases etc.). Through the use of
software or other automated processes, an analysis is made of
relevant texts and data in order to obtain new insights,
patterns and trends.

The textsand data used for mining are either freely accessible
on the internet or accessible through subscriptions to e.g.
journals and periodicals that give access to the databases of
publishers. A copy is made of the relevant texts and data (e.g.
on browser cachememories or in computers RAM memories or onto
the hard disk of a computer), prior to the actual analysis.
Normally, it is considered that to mine protected works or
other subject matter, it is necessary to obtain authorisation
from the right holders for the making of such copies unless
such authorisation can be implied (e.g. content accessible to
general public without restrictions on the internet, open
access).

Some argue that the copies required for text and data mining are
covered by the exception fortemporary copies in Article 5.1 of
Directive 2001/29/EC. Others consider that text and data mining
activities should not even be seen as covered by copyright. None
of this is clear, in particular since text and data mining does
not consist only of a singlemethod, but can be undertaken in
several different ways. Important questions also remain as to
whether the main problems arising in relation to this issue go
beyond copyright (i.e. beyond the necessity or not to obtain
the authorisation to use content) and relate rather to the need
to obtain “access” to content (i.e. being able to use e.g.
commercial databases).

A specific Working Group was set up on this issue in the
framework of the "Licences for Europe" stakeholder dialogue. No
consensus was reached among participating stakeholders on either
the problems to be addressed or the results. At the same time,
practical solutions to facilitate text and data mining of
subscription-based scientific content were presented by
publishers as an outcome of “Licencesfor Europe”52

See the document “Licences for Europe – ten pledges to bring
more content
online”:http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/copyright/docs/licences-for-europe/131113_ten-pledges_en.pdf.

. In the context of these discussions, other stakeholders argued
that no additional licences should be required to mine material
to which access has been provided through a subscription
agreement and considered that a specific exception for text and
data mining should be introduced, possibly on the basis of
a distinction between commercial and non-commercial.

(a)[In particular if you are an end user/consumeror an
institutional user:]Have you experienced obstacles, linked to
copyright, when trying to use text or data mining methods,
including across borders?

(b)[In particular if you are a service provider:]Have you
experienced obstacles, linked to copyright, when providing
services based on text or data mining methods, including across
borders?

(c)[In particular if you are a right holder:]Have you
experienced specific problems resulting from the use of text
and data mining in relation to copyright protected content,
including across borders?

 YES – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO OPINION

Ifthere are problems, how would they best be solved?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

If your view is that a legislative solution is needed, what
would be its main elements? Which activities shouldbe covered
and under what conditions?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

If your view is that a different solution is needed, what would
it be?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Are there other issues, unrelated to copyright, that constitute
barriers to the use of text or data mining methods?

[Open question] ……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

User-generated content

Technological and service developments mean that citizens can
copy, use and distribute content at little to no financial
cost. As a consequence, new types of online activities are
developing rapidly, including the making of
so-called“user-generated content”. While users can create
totally original content, they can also take one or several
pre-existing works, change something in the work(s), and upload
the result on the Internet e.g. to platforms and blogs53

A typical example couldbe the “kitchen” or “wedding” video
(adding one's own video to a pre-existing sound recording), or
adding one's own text to a pre-existing photograph. Other
examples are “mash-ups” (blending two sound recordings), and
reproducing parts of journalistic work(report, review etc.) in
a blog.

. User-generated content (UGC) can thus cover the modification
of pre-existing works even if the newly-generated/"uploaded"
work does not necessarily require a creative effort and results
from merely adding, subtracting orassociating some pre-existing
content with other pre-existing content. This kind of activity
is not “new” as such. However, the development of social
networking and social media sites that enable users to share
content widely has vastly changed the scale of such activities
and increased the potential economic impact for those holding
rights in the pre-existing works. Re-use is no longer the
preserve of a technically and artistically adept elite. With
the possibilities offered by the new technologies, re-useis
open to all, at no cost. This in turn raises questions with
regard to fundamental rights such the freedom of expression and
the right to property.

A specific Working Group was set up on this issue in the
framework of the "Licences for Europe" stakeholder dialogue. No
consensus was reached among participating stakeholders on either
the problems to be addressed or the results or even the
definition of UGC. Nevertheless, a wide range of views were
presented as to the best way to respond to this phenomenon.One
view was to say that a new exception is needed to cover UGC, in
particular non-commercial activities by individuals such as
combining existing musical works with videos, sequences of
photos, etc. Another view was that no legislative change is
needed:UGC is flourishing, and licensing schemes are
increasingly available (licence schemes concluded between
rightholders and platforms as well as micro-licences concluded
between rightholders and the users generating the content. In
any event, practical solutions to ease user-generated content
and facilitate micro-licensing for small users were pledged by
rightholders across different sectors as a result of the
“Licences for Europe” discussions54

See the document “Licences for Europe – ten pledges to bring
more content
online”:http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/copyright/docs/licences-for-europe/131113_ten-pledges_en.pdf.

.

(a)[In particular ifyou are an end user/consumer:]Have you
experienced problems when trying to use pre-existing works or
other subject matter to disseminate new content on the
Internet, including across borders?

(b)[In particular if you are a service provider:]Have you
experienced problems when users publish/disseminate new content
based on the pre-existing works or other subject-matter through
your service, including across borders?

(c)[In particular if you are a right holder:]Have you
experienced problems resulting from the way the users are using
pre-existing works or other subject-matter to disseminate new
content on the Internet, including across borders?

 YES – Please explain by giving examples

Det händer ofta att jag stöter på torrenttrackers och andra
p2p-nätverksom är blockerade av internetleverantörer. Dessutom
får jag inte posta vilka länkar jag vill på plattformar som
Facebook - de klassas som "spam" eller "dåligt material" trots
att jag vet att de inte är det. Detgör det mycket svårare för
mig att dela ochta del av material på nätet. När jag försöker
dela med mig av musik eller filmklipp från YouTube till vänner
kan det hända att materialet helt har fallit bort - som
säkerhetsmekanism har jag börjat kopiera materialet till min
egen hårddisk men det har börjat bli svårare på grund av
tekniska skyddsåtgärder. Det gör att jag inte kan dela med mig
av positiva upplevelser till andra (min favorit: en låt av Wood
Kid från en Renault-reklam som remixats av Gucci Vump och lagts
upp av en person som absolut inte tyckte det var bra att begå
upphovsrättsintrång men som upplevde att just denna låt var så
otroligt bra att han kunde bortse från det i syfte att få andra
människor att höra låten - den är också otroligt bra!).

 NO

 NO OPINION

(a)[In particular if you are an end user/consumer or a right
holder:]Have you experienced problems when trying to ensure
that the work you have created (on the basis of pre-existing
works) is properly identified for online use? Are proprietary
systems sufficient in this context?

(b)[In particular if you are a service provider:]Do you provide
possibilities for users that are publishing/disseminating the
works they have created (on the basis of pre-existing works)
through your service to properly identify these works for
online use?

 YES – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO OPINION

(a)[In particular if you are an end user/consumer or a right
holder):]Have you experienced problems when trying to be
remunerated for the use of the work you have created (on the
basis of pre-existing works)?

(b)[In particular if you are a service provider:]Do you provide
remuneration schemesfor users publishing/disseminating the
works they have created (on the basis of pre-existing works)
through your service?

 YES – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO – Please explain

Att fåbetalt är verkligen inte det stora problemet, utan att
över huvud taget kunna använda digitala teknologier i rättslig
säkerhet. Jag vill inte ha ett internet som helt centralstyrs på
bas av vad sex eller sju företag från Kaliforniern för
närvarande får försig fungerar bra, och justnu håller de på
att manipulera stora institutioner som W3C och ICANN för att få
dem att bygga in deras önskemål i grunderna för den tekniska
infrastrukturen. Det känns inte alls bra, och kommissionen bör
allvarligt överväga om det inte är bättre för Europa att ha ett
verktyg som tillåter bättre möjligheter att sprida och dela
kulturella erfarenheter mellan europeiska nationer.

 NO OPINION

If there are problems, how would they best be solved?

[Open question]

Vi behöver enlagreform enligt alla frågor ovan.

If your view is that a legislative solution is needed, what
would be its main elements? Which activities should be covered
and under what conditions?

[Open question]

Fler undantag och begränsningar på det sätt sombeskrivits i
fråga 22-26, fråga 13, fråga 80 nedan, fråga 40, och som gör
att problemen i fråga 1, 2, 58 samt frågorna 75-77 inte
uppstår. Vi behöver också se till att töntiga, larviga förslag
som de i fråga 11-12 omedelbart avfärdas. Vi behöver se till att
tekniska leverantörer inte blir skyldiga att kontrollera alla
hela tiden - Europa behöver fritt tänkande individer som kan
bygga egna gemenskaper över gränserna på det sätt de är bra på.
Se fråga 80.

If your view is that a different solution is needed,what would
it be?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Private copying and reprography

Directive 2001/29/EC enables Member States to implement in their
national legislation exceptions or limitationsto the
reproduction right for copies made for private use and
photocopying55

Article 5. 2)(a) and (b) of Directive 2001/29.

. Levies are charges imposed at national level on goods
typically used for such purposes (blank media, recording
equipment, photocopying machines, mobile listening devices such
as mp3/mp4 players, computers, etc.) with a view to compensating
rightholders for the harm they suffer when copies are made
without their authorisation by certain categories of persons
(i.e. natural persons making copies for their private use) or
through use of certain technique (i.e. reprography). In that
context, levies are important for rightholders.

With the constant developments in digital technology, the
question arises as to whether the copying of files
byconsumers/end-users who have purchased content online - e.g.
when a person has bought an MP3 file and goes on to store
multiple copies of that file (in her computer, her tablet and
her mobile phone) - also triggers, or should trigger, the
application of private copying levies. It is argued that, in
some cases, these levies may indeed be claimed by rightholders
whether or not the licence fee paid by the service provider
already covers copies made by the end user. This approach could
potentially lead to instances of double payments whereby levies
could be claimed on top of service providers’ licence fees56

Communication "Unleashing the Potential of Cloud Computing in
Europe", COM(2012) 529 final.

57

These issues were addressed in the recommendations of Mr António
Vitorino resulting from the mediation on private copying and
reprography levies. You can consult these recommendations on
the following
website:http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/copyright/docs/levy_reform/130131_levies-vitorino-recommendations_en.pdf.

.

There is also an on-going discussion as to the application or
not of levies to certain types of cloud-based services such as
personal lockers or personal video recorders.

In your view, is there a need to clarify at the EU level the
scope and application of the private copying and reprography
exceptions58

Art. 5.2(a) and 5.2(b) of Directive 2001/29/EC.

in the digital environment?

 YES – Please explain

Vi behöver en rättighet för privatpersoner att göra verk
tillgängliga offentligt efter att de offentliggjorts första
gången. Vi behöver en teknisk infrastruktur som inte begränsar
användares juridiska och mänskliga rättigheter.Vi behöver en ny
upphovsrätt som tjänar allas intressen, inte bara ett fåtal
storföretag från Hollywood.

 NO – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO OPINION

Should digital copies made by endusers for private purposes in
the context of a service that has been licensed by
rightholders, and where the harm to the rightholder is minimal,
be subject to private copying levies?59

This issue was also addressed in the recommendations of Mr
Antonio Vitorino resulting from the mediation on private
copying and reprography levies

 YES – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO – Please explain

Se svar på fråga 66.

 NO OPINION

How would changes inlevies with respect to the application to
online services (e.g. services based on cloud computing
allowing, for instance, users to have copies on different
devices) impact the development and functioning of new business
models on the one hand and rightholders’ revenue on the other?

[Open question]

Att ha kassettersättning på molnet kommer allvarligt skada
europeisk industri och europeiska möjligheter att utveckla
tjänster. Vi kan inte och kommer inte att få en europeisk
IT-industri om vi ständigt dödar alla innovatörer och
entreprenörer i Europa med upphovsrätten. Ju fler
ersättningsmodeller på olika nivåer man utkräver desto mer
centraliserade kommer affärsmodellerna att bli:
upphovsrättsersättningarna kräver att plattformen (molnet)
kan betala avgiftenoch hantera juridiken, vilket premierar
stora leverantörer framför små leverantörer, och dessutom
kommer man behöva utveckla tekniska modeller för att låsa in
och kontrollera användarna så att de inte gör på fel sätt.
Resultatet blir ofria användare och enväldigt centraliserad och
centralstyrd marknad utan stor innovationspotential. Det vore
synd och jag vill hellre att det ska vara tvärtom - att
användare och europeiska medborgare får en friare relation
till kultur och att småföretag gynnas. Jämför svareni fråga 80.

Would you see an added value in making levies visible on the
invoices for products subject to levies?60

This issue was also addressed in the recommendations of Mr
Antonio Vitorino resulting from the mediation on private
copying and reprography levies.

 YES – Please explain

Det är rimligt att konsumenterna vet vad de betalar för och till
vem.

 NO – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO OPINION

Diverging national systems levydifferent products and apply
different tariffs. This results in obstacles to the free
circulation of goods and services in the Single Market. At the
same time, many Member States continue to allow the
indiscriminate application of private copying levies toall
transactions irrespective of the person to whom the product
subject to a levy is sold (e.g. private person or business). In
that context, not all Member States have ex ante exemption
and/or ex post reimbursement schemes which could remedy these
situations and reduce the number of undue payments61

This issue was also addressed in the recommendations of Mr
Antonio Vitorino resulting from the mediation on private
copying and reprography levies.

.

Have you experienced a situation where a cross-border
transaction resulted in undue levy payments, or duplicate
payments of the same levy, or other obstacles to the free
movement of goods or services?

 YES – Please specify the type of transaction and indicate
the percentage of the undue payments. Please alsoindicate how a
priori exemption and/or ex post reimbursement schemes could help
to remedy the situation.

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO OPINION

What percentage of products subject to a levy is sold to persons
other than natural persons for purposes clearly unrelated to
private copying? Do any of those transactions result in undue
payments? Please explain indetail the example you provide (type
of products, type of transaction, stakeholders, etc.).

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Where such undue payments arise, what percentage of trade do
they affect? To what extent could a priori exemptions and/or ex
post reimbursement schemes existing in some Member States help
to remedy the situation?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

If you haveidentified specific problems with the current
functioning of the levy system, how would these problems best
be solved?

[Open question]

Ta bort kassettersättningen. Extraskatter utanför den normala
skatten som är helt och hållet privat betingade är inte bra.

Fair remuneration of authors and performers

The EU copyright acquis recognises for authors and performers a
number of exclusive rights and, in the case of performers whose
performances are fixed in phonograms, remuneration rights. There
are fewprovisions in the EU copyright law governing
thetransferof rights from authors or performers to producers62

See e.g. Directive 92/100/EEC, Art.2(4)-(7).

or determining who the owner of the rights is when the work or
other subject matter is created in the context of an employment
contract63

See e.g. Art. 2.3. of Directive 2009/24/EC, Art. 4 of Directive
96/9/EC.

. This is anarea that has been traditionally left for Member
States to regulate and there are significant differences in
regulatory approaches.Substantial differences also exist
between different sectors of the creative industries.

Concerns continue to be raised that authors and performers are
not adequately remunerated, in particular but not solely, as
regards online exploitation. Many considerthat the economic
benefit of new forms of exploitation is not being fairly shared
along the whole value chain. Another commonly raised issue
concerns contractual practices, negotiation mechanisms,
presumptions of transfer of rights, buy-out clauses and the
lack of possibility to terminate contracts. Some stakeholders
are of the opinion that rules at national level do not suffice
to improve their situation and that action at EU level is
necessary.

[In particular if you are an author/performer:] What is the best
mechanism (or combination of mechanisms) to ensure that you
receive an adequate remuneration for the exploitation of your
works and performances?

[Open question]

Vi behöver en mer omfattande studie av hur ekonomin i
kulturbranschen faktiskt fungerar. Upphovsrätten bygger på
föreställningen att man behöver ha betalning per kopia, men i
praktiken verkar det inte fungera särskilt bra med hur både
internet, användare och entreprenörer försöker ta sig fram. Vi
behöver kanske tänka på helt nya modeller.

Is there a need to act at the EU level (for instance to prohibit
certain clauses in contracts)?

 YES – Please explain

Ett stort problem idag är att användare inte får göra sånt de
faktiskt får göra. Man får inte citera som man vill, man får
inteprivatkopiera som man har rätt till i digitala miljöer.
Just nu verkar det finnas jättestarka incitament att tekniskt
begränsa användarnas juridiska rättigheter vilket är ett stort
problem. Det borde göras mycket tydligare att man inte får
frånta människorde rättigheter lagstiftaren givit dem i avtal
och genom teknologi.

 NO – Please explain why

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO OPINION

If you consider that the current rules are not effective, what
wouldyou suggest to address the shortcomings you identify?

[Open question]

Vi behöver en lagändring som tydliggör att det är lagstiftaren
som bestämmer vilka rättigheter och friheter människor ska ha
när de interagerar med varandra och med kultur.

Respect for rights

Directive 2004/48/EE64

Directive 2004/48/EC of the European Parliament and of the
Council of 29 April 2004 on the enforcement of intellectual
property rights.

provides for a harmonised framework for the civil enforcement of
intellectual propertyrights, including copyright and related
rights. The Commission has consulted broadly on this text65

You will find more information on the following
website:http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/iprenforcement/directive/index_en.htm

. Concerns have been raised as to whether some of its provisions
are still fit to ensure a proper respect for copyright in the
digital age. On the one hand, the current measures seem to
beinsufficient to deal with the new challenges brought by the
dissemination of digital content on the internet; on the other
hand, there are concerns about the current balance between
enforcement of copyright and the protection of fundamental
rights, in particular the right for a private life and data
protection. While it cannot be contested that enforcement
measures should always be available in case of infringement of
copyright, measures could be proposed to strengthen respect for
copyright when the infringed content is used for a commercial
purpose66

For example when the infringing content is offered on a website
which gets advertising revenues that depend on the volume of
traffic.

. One means to do this could be to clarify the role of
intermediaries in the IP infrastructure67

This clarification should not affect the liability regime of
intermediary service providers established by Directive
2000/31/EC on electronic commerce, which will remain unchanged.

. At the same time, there could be clarification of the
safeguards for respect of private life and data protection for
private users.

Should the civil enforcement system in the EU be rendered more
efficient for infringements of copyright committed with a
commercial purpose?

 YES – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO – Please explain

Man kan inte skapa hårda straff för en lagstiftning som ingen
håller med om. Innan man börjar fundera på skarpare
straffskalor bör man istället fundera överen europeisk strategi
för internettjänster - internet och Europa är distribuerade till
sin natur, med många mötesplattformar, innovationer och kulturer
som ska samsas. Däremot har vi ingen sammanhållen strategi för
hur vi ska använda internet på ett sätt som gynnar oss.
Istället förs all internetpolitik hipp som happ efter vilken
industri som lyckas charma vilken kommissionär, eller vilken
kommissionärs tjänstemän. Att förändra upphovsrättslagen till
någonting européer faktiskt håller med om är det enda steg vi
för närvarande behöver för att skapa en rimlig framtid åt oss
själva. Till exempel genom att kasta ett uppmärksamt öga på de
bekymmer som lyfts i den här konsultationen.

 NO OPINION

In particular, is the current legal framework clear enough
toallow for sufficient involvement of intermediaries (such as
Internet service providers, advertising brokers, payment
service providers, domain name registrars, etc.) in inhibiting
online copyright infringements with a commercial purpose? If
not, what measures would be useful to foster the cooperation of
intermediaries?

[Open question]

Vi behöver mindre ansvar på mellanhänder. Budbärarimmunitet är
precis lika viktigt på internet och i upphovsrättssammanhang
som i andra sammanhang. Genom att göra Google, Facebook,
internetoperatörer och andra plattformar juridiskt ansvariga
för hur vi som användare beter oss, får de starka incitament
att utveckla plattformar som kontrollerar och styr vårt
beteende på ett sätt att de själva kan undvika ansvar. Det
skapar centraliserade och dåliga system, som går emot både en
europeiska ekonomin och tanken på europeiskt samarbete.
Dessutom skapar det otrivsel och dålig självständighet för
användarna vilket förhindrar vidare innovation. Vi behöver
snarare större fokus på individuella friheter, rättigheter och
möjligheter för europeiska medborgare att hjälpas åt att bygga
kulturella lösningar och teknologier för framtiden.
Rättssäkerhet är också enormt viktigt för de som försöker
tillhandahålla innovationer och tjänster på nätet. Detta visas
inte minst av kommissionens egna gedigna arbete kring "notice
and action"-provisionerna i e-Handelsdirektivet från 2000
(http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/e-commerce/notice-and-action/index_en.htm
). Det är inget okänt problem att entreprenörer och
framtidsindustrier tycker att Europa är en läskig marknad just
för att vi inte satsar på juridisk säkerhet för företag. Jag
träffar ofta människor som försöker bygga meshnätverk i
europeiska städer (trådlös teknologi) eller nya plattformar som
över huvud taget inte känner att de har juridisk säkerhet. De
vet inte vad de får och inte får göra och de är rädda att fråga
utifall att de då tvingas gå till domstol. En portugisisk
förening som hjälper andra hjälpa sina grannar få trådlöst
internet funderadepå att helt lägga ned sin verksamhet, som
ändå hade hjälpt många i Portugal att komma åt internet, på
grund av den här frågan. Samma problem har erfarits i Tyskland
och Österrike, samt Grekland, med trådlösa nätverk i
närområden. Vi kan inte ha ett mellanhandsansvar som
förhindrar innovation och samhälleligt viktiga aktiviteter. Då
är det något fel på systemet.

Does the current civil enforcement framework ensure that the
right balance is achieved between the right to have one’s
copyright respected and other rights such as the protection of
private life and protection of personal data?

 YES – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO – Please explain

Det nuvarande regelverket är helt fokuserat på
rättighetsinnehavarna. Alla andra rättigheter åsidosätts grovt
av lagstiftaren. Vi behöver en upphovsrätt som tar alla i
beaktande och se till att lagstiftningen skrivs baserat på
balanserad information istället för industripropaganda. Bland
annat hamnar rättigheten att begära en sida nedtagen som nu
implementeras i Italien, Spanien, Frankrike på kant med
medborgarens rättighet att få sina personuppgifter utlämnade
från samma hemsida. Här verkar medlemsländerna helt åsidosätta
medborgarnas grundläggande mänskliga rättigheter enligt stadgan
för mänskliga rättigheter artikel 7, samt dataskyddsdirektivet
och den kommande förordningen. Man har heller inget starkt
eller adekvat skydd för yttrandefrihet som bygger på föregående
prövning. Under IPRED åsidosätter mankommunikationskunders
rättmätiga förväntan på konfidentialitet i korrespondens och
privatiserar polisiära åtgärder för informationstillgång till
rättighetsinnehavare trots att det allvarligt stör
medborgarnas möjlighet till privat korrespondens i
digitalamiljöer, i enlighet med direktivet om privatliv I
elektronisk kommunikation. Hela upphovsrättslagstiftningen
behöver börja fokusera mer på hur den skavara nyttig för alla
i samhället, inte bara hur den ska konsolidera redan
dominerande aktörers starka ställning på bekostnad av alla
andras rättigheter.

 NO OPINION

A single EU Copyright Title

The idea of establishing a unified EU Copyright Title has been
present in the copyright debate for quite some time now,
although views as to the merits and thefeasibility of such an
objective are divided. A unified EU Copyright Title would
totally harmonise the area of copyright law in the EU and
replace national laws. There would then be a single EU title
instead of a bundle of national rights. Some see this asthe
only manner in which a truly Single Market for content
protected by copyright can be ensured, while others believe
that the same objective can better be achieved by establishing
a higher level of harmonisation while allowing for a certain
degree of flexibility and specificity in Member States’ legal
systems.

Should the EU pursue the establishment of a single EU Copyright
Title, as a means of establishing a consistent framework for
rights and exceptions to copyright across the EU, as well as a
singleframework for enforcement?

 YES

 NO

 NO OPINION

Should this be the next step in the development of copyright in
the EU? Does the current level of difference among the Member
State legislation mean that this is a longer term project?

[Open question]

Upphovsrätten bör definitivt harmoniseras så snabbt som möjligt,
göras mer flexibel och förändras. Det är bara politisk vilja att
skapa en dräglig situation för alla som saknas!

Other issues

The above questionnaire aims to provide a comprehensive
consultation on the most important matters relating to the
current EU legal framework for copyright. Should any important
matters have been omitted, we would appreciate if you could
bring them to our attention, so they can be properly addressed
in the future.

Are there any other important matters related to the EU legal
framework for copyright? Please explain and indicate how such
matters should be addressed.

[Open question]

Här är en ganska kort lista över innovationshindrande åtgärder
som stört mig genom åren:Napster och LimeWire : Populära
plattform för kulturdelning som efter stämningshot och
förbudsföreläggande fick lägga ned legitima verksamheter och
nu bara finns som piratplattformar. OiNK, Demonoid, MiniNova
och The Pirate Bay: Superpopuläratorrenttrackers som glatt
många med sitt oerhört stora utbud och gemenskap. De har
blivit nedtagna av stora stämningar, spontana regeringshot och
häxjakt. De är inte heller ensamma i sjön. Det är väldigt
konstigt efter samtliga plattformar egentligen varit väldigt
brapå att skapa en europeisk modell för sociala nätverk på
nätet: OiNK var brittiskt, TPB är svenskt, Demonoid var i
Ukraina, MiniNova nederländska. Det finns fortfarande levande
torrentkultur i både Ryssland, Rumänien och Moldavien, men
särskilt Ryssland har valt att gå mycket hårt åt
torrentnätverk senaste året - utan något egentligt bra
anledning. Torrentplattformar bygger på lika delar samarbete
och gemenskap om att uppnå gemensamma mål - vanligtvis delning
av film, musik, datorprogram eller böcker. Det passar Europa
väldigt bra, för vi saknar plattformar för ömsesidig
förståelse och kulturell gemenskap. Vi är bäst i världen på
att utveckla sådana här plattformar och få dem stora, populära
och använda. Det är ironiskt att vi kriminaliserar de som gör
det vi i Europa är bra på: samarbete och byta kultur, och
istället fokuserar på centraliserade modeller. Relevanta
frågor: fråga 58, fråga 80. Undertexter.se , Bierdopje.com,
Norsub.com, och Qsubs: Det tog lång tid för
upphovsrättsindustrin att fatta att undertexter var populära
för att de gör kultur mer tillgängligt för många fler. Därför
har man nu börjat gå emot både sidor som tillhandahåller
undertexter och sidor som tillhandahåller låttexter. Om man
hade haft ett genuint intresse av att bära kostnaden för att
framställa de här undertexterna och låttexterna själva hade man
kunnat börja göra det för länge sedan. De här stämningarna och
nedtagningarna syftar inte till någonting annat än att få bort
människor som var kreativare, duktigare och bättre på att
göranya tjänster som människor faktiskt vill ha. Relevanta
frågor: fråga 80. UsedSoft, ReDigi, VZVB:
Andrahandsförsäljning av datorspel, musik, böcker och filmer
som införskaffats i digitalt format är hårt motarbetat av
upphovsrättsindustrin som menar att deras snarstående undergång
kommer påskyndas av denna fatala aktivitet som hotar allt
skapande. Man förhindrar andrahandsförsäljning på flertalet
plattformar (Valve/Steam, PlayStation, Nook, Kindle, osv) genom
olika typer av kopieringsskydd. Av uppenbara skälär det inte bra
att centralisera distributionen av kultur, mjukvara och
produkter på det här sättet - det har heller ingen föregångar
utanför digitala sammanhang. Att förhindra
andrahandsförsäljning handlar bara om att hålla tillbaka
entreprenörer och innovation, skapar sämre förutsättningar för
europeiska småföretagare och sämre, mer centraliserad tillgång
till kultur. Relevant fråga: fråga 13. Google News, Gaspedaal,
Infopaq: När man gör nya databaser av gamla databaser, genom
att till exempel meta-söka igenom ett antal stora sökmotorer åt
sina kunder (som DoHop, Flygresor eller Gaspedaal gör) får man
tydligen inte göra dett utan att betala avgifter och be om
tillåtelse från den som först hade databasen. Detta skapar
enormt svåra förutsättningar för precisalla aktörer som inte
redan är etablerade på marknaden. I Tyskland har frågan ställts
på sin spets när man skapade en helt ny lag bara för att skyffla
pengar mellan Google och tidningsförläggare. När man
avgiftsbelägger och förhindrar även mycket små kopierade
stycken från nyhetsartiklar, böcker, akademiska artiklar,
musikstycken eller vad det nu kan vara gör man det oerhört
svårt för alla nya konkurrenter att etablera sig på marknaden.
Det är nämligen bara stora, etablerade aktörer som har råd att
betalaoch förhandla fram licenser för sån här användning.
Resultatet blir återigen centralisering, koncentration och
kontroll av både användare och innovation. Mycket misslyckat!
Relevant fråga: fråga 80. Här är en annan lista på
affärsmodeller som upphovsrättengivit upphov till som jag tror
är direkt kontraproduktiva för samhället: ACS:Law och MediaCAT:
Brittiska juristfirmor som skickar stämningsbrev till människor
med anklagelse om upphovsrättsintrång. Efter flera års
utpressningsverksamhet fick ACS:Law näringsförbud av en
brittisk domstol, men det var många personer och hushåll som
drabbades av stress, ångest och bluffakturor innan
rättssystemet åtgärdade problemet. Det är jättetydligt att vi
inte alls prioriterar rättssäkerhet för individer på samma nivå
somför rättighetinnehavare. Upphovsrättstroll har också
uppmärksammats i Tyskland, av amerikanska militären(!), och
EFF. Det här borde rimligtvis räknas som utpressning,
ingetannat. Anti-pirattrojaner och anti-pirat-ddos: Det är inte
alls bra att rättighetsinnehavare omgärdas av ett regelverk som
gör det både tillåtet och möjligt för dem att investera i
tekniska produkter som normala människor straffas hårt för att
använda, även i icke-kommersiellt syfte. När man använder
trojaner, virus och ddos-attacker för att hindra kopiering av
kultur på nätet, och dessutom köper in sådana tjänster från
underleverantörer, och hävdar att man gör detta för att skydda
ett berättigat ekonomiskt intresse borde det klassas som
organiserad brottslighet, inget annat. Minitel : Minitel är ett
gammalt franskt nätverk som utvecklades av France Telecom på
1980-talet. Det var helt centraliserat och Televerket hade full
kontroll över vad användare fick och inte fick göra på nätet,
samt vad som gick och inte gick att göra på nätet. Minitel
började stängas ned 1997 efter att internet - en fri och öppen
plattform - visade sig vara mycket bättre för innovation,
entreprenörskap och användarnas välbefinnande. Den svenska
inkarnationen, som stängdes redan i slutet av 1980-talet, hette
Teleguide. Det som händer på internet nu är att många
internetoperatörer och andra återskapar Minitels i huvudsak
begränsande funktioner. AT&T vill centralt kontrollera att
användare inte piratkopierar. Storbritannien har satt upp ett
stort filter för att skydda folket från det omoraliska, fria
nästet som utgör ett ej centralt kontrollerat internet.
Microsoft har utvecklat PhotoDNA - ett uppladdningsfilter som
tillåter att man förhindrar uppladdningen av oönskat material
på nätet. Det testas nu av europeiska polismyndigheter. Felet
med allt det här är, att det som gör och har gjort internet
bra, är just att det inte varit en centralt kontrollerad
plattform. När man återskapar Minitel i efterhand tar man också
bort allt det som gjorde internet till ett revolutionerande
verktyg som var genuint nyttigt för människor.
Upphovsrättslagen borde inte påskynda och uppmuntra den
processen. DRM är inte egentligen ett problem för att det
finns, utan har blivit ett problem för att man särskilt i USA
tillåter att tekniska skyddsåtgärder omdefinierar lagen. Så
länge man kan tekniskt och genom avtal begränsar användare i
högre utsträckning än lagen tillåter (genom
internetfiltrering, kopieringsskydd, eller vad det nu kan vara)
så verkar vi tillåta det på internet. Som medborgare måste man
kunna förlita sig på att de rättigheter lagstiftarna ger oss är
de som gäller. Lagen måste vara tydlig med hur människor i
samhället får och inte får umgås, utan detta överlåts på
företag som dessutom ska samarbeta med varandra om att
kontrollera vadanvändare ska göra! Detta har också kommissionen
själv uppmärksammad i COM (2014) 72
(http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=COM:2014:0072:FIN:EN:PDF
) Problemet med att tillverkare av DRM får kontrollera alla
efterföljande marknader och icke-marknader har diskuterats
länge. Hal Varian menade 2002 att man ger stora möjligheter
för chiptillverkare och hårdvarutillverkare att kontrollera
konkurrensen på alla efterföljande marknader genom att
implementera kopieringsskydd - inte bara för
upphovsrättsskyddade verk utan för allt möjligt (skrivare,
videosändningar, musik, film, och mera). För specifikt
upphovsrättsskyddade verk innebär DRM att bibliotek,
universitet och arkiv inte fritt kan förfoga över kultur och
låna ut till biblioteksbesökarna påinternet. En ny studie från
Tilburg i Nederländerna
(http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2338976 )
menar att vi bland annat har olika kultur kring DRM i USA och
Europa - den europeiska lagstiftningen uppmuntrar
teknikföretag, upphovsrättsinnehavare och regeringar att inte
inskränka användares lagstiftade rättigheter. En äldre studie
från Jönköpings universitet
(http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=704101 )
menar dock samtidigt att den europeiska lagen ger större
befogenheter för rättighetsinnehavare att helt kringgå
användarnas lagstiftade rättigheter eftersom man inte är
tvingad att respektera användare. Europeisk upphovsrättslag är
inte implementerad på samma sätt i alla medlemsländer vilket
skapar juridisk osäkerhet. Den förändras inte heller särskilt
ofta, till skillnad från amerikanska lagar som förändras mycket
oftare (bland annat på grund av kongressens initiativrätt, som
ju Europaparlamentet inte har). I den här sammanställning kan
man se ett stort antal fall där DRM ochanvändares rättigheter
kommit på kant med
varandra:http://janlindgren.se/2008/10/25/kriget-mot-fildelningen/
Men man ska också komma ihåg att när det gäller fysiska
CD-skivor har vi i Europa sedan länge haft ståndpunkten att
tekniska skyddsåtgärder inte ska skriva lag åt medborgarna. (
http://www.indicare.org/tiki-read_article.php?articleId=180 )
En väldigt stark faktor till att DRM blir ett stort problem är
att vi gör mellanhänder ansvariga för vad användare gör. Genom
att göra Google, Facebook, internetoperatörer och andra
plattformar juridiskt ansvariga för hur vi som användare beter
oss, får de starka incitament att utveckla plattformar som
kontrollerar och styr vårt beteende på ett sätt att de själva
kan undvika ansvar. Det skapar centraliserade och dåliga
system, som i alla fall jag menar är dåliga för både ekonomin
och för tanken på europeiskt samarbete. Eller som EU:s grundare
Robert Schuman sa i sin deklaration 9 maj 1950: "Världsfreden
kan inte upprätthållas utan konstruktiva insatser som är
proportionerliga mot hotbilden. /.../ Ett enat Europa kan inte
bli verklighet på en enda gång och inte heller genom en
helhetslösning. Det kommer att bygga på konkreta resultat,
varigenom man först skapar en verklig solidaritet." Just nu
verkar DRM riskera att bli den helhetslösning som inte verkar
för solidaritet, och heller inte ger konkreta resultat för
medborgarna varken i form av vänskap, kulturutbyte eller
innovationskraft.

