
Public Consultation

on the review of the EU copyright rules

Contents

I.Introduction2

A.Context of the consultation2

B.How to submit replies to this questionnaire3

C.Confidentiality3

II.Rights and the functioning of the Single Market7

A.Why is it not possible to access many online content services
from anywhere in Europe?7

B.Is there a need for more clarity as regards the scope of what
needs to be authorised (or not) in digital transmissions?10

1.The act of “making available”10

2.Two rights involved in a single act of exploitation11

3.Linking and browsing12

4.Download to own digital content13

C.Registration of works and other subject matter – is it a good
idea?14

D.How to improve the use and interoperability of identifiers15

E.Term of protection – is it appropriate?15

III.Limitations and exceptions in the Single Market16

A.Access to content in libraries and archives19

1.Preservation and archiving19

2.Off-premises access to library collections20

3.E – lending21

4.Mass digitisation22

B.Teaching23

C.Research25

D.Disabilities25

E.Text and data mining27

F.User-generated content28

IV.Private copying and reprography31

V.Fair remuneration of authors and performers33

VI.Respect for rights34

VII.A single EU Copyright Title36

VIII.Other issues36

Introduction

Context of the consultation

Over the last two decades, digital technology and the Internet
have reshaped the ways in which content is created,
distributed, and accessed. New opportunities have materialised
for those that create and produce content (e.g. a film, a
novel, a song), for new and existing distribution platforms,
for institutions such as libraries, for activities such as
research and for citizens who now expect to be able to access
content – for information, education or entertainment purposes
– regardless of geographical borders.

This new environment also presents challenges. One of them is
for the market to continue to adapt to new forms of
distribution and use. Another one is for the legislator to
ensure that the system of rights, limitations to rights and
enforcement remains appropriate and is adapted to the new
environment. This consultation focuses on the second of these
challenges: ensuring that the EU copyright regulatory framework
stays fit for purpose in the digital environment to support
creation and innovation, tap the full potential of the Single
Market, foster growth and investment in our economy and promote
cultural diversity.

In its "Communication on Content in the Digital Single Market"
the Commission set out two parallel tracks of action: on the
one hand, to complete its on-going effort to review and to
modernise the EU copyright legislative framework with a view to
a decision in 2014 on whether to table legislative reform
proposals, and on the other, to facilitate practical
industry-led solutions through the stakeholder dialogue
"Licences for Europe" on issues on which rapid progress was
deemed necessary and possible.

The "Licences for Europe" process has been finalised now. The
Commission welcomes the practical solutions stakeholders have
put forward in this context and will monitor their progress.
Pledges have been made by stakeholders in all four Working
Groups (cross border portability of services, user-generated
content, audiovisual and film heritage and text and data
mining). Taken together, the Commission expects these pledges
to be a further step in making the user environment easier in
many different situations. The Commission also takes note of
the fact that two groups – user-generated content and text and
data mining – did not reach consensus among participating
stakeholders on either the problems to be addressed or on the
results. The discussions and results of "Licences for Europe"
will be also taken into account in the context of the review of
the legislative framework.

As part of the review process, the Commission is now launching a
public consultation on issues identified in the Communication on
Content in the Digital Single Market, i.e.:"territoriality in
the Internal Market, harmonisation, limitations and exceptions
to copyright in the digital age; fragmentation of the EU
copyright market; and how to improve the effectiveness and
efficiency of enforcement while underpinning its legitimacy in
the wider context of copyright reform". As highlighted in the
October 2013 European Council Conclusions"Providing digital
services and content across the single market requires the
establishment of a copyright regime for the digital age. The
Commission will therefore complete its on-going review of the
EU copyright framework in spring 2014. It is important to
modernise Europe's copyright regime and facilitate licensing,
while ensuring a high level protection of intellectual property
rights and taking into account cultural diversity".

This consultation builds on previous consultations and public
hearings, in particular those on the "Green Paper on copyright
in the knowledge economy", the "Green Paper on the online
distribution of audiovisual works" and "Content Online". These
consultations provided valuable feedback from stakeholders on a
number of questions, on issues as diverse as the territoriality
of copyright and possible ways to overcome territoriality,
exceptions related to the online dissemination of knowledge,
and rightholders’ remuneration, particularly in the audiovisual
sector. Views were expressed by stakeholders representing all
stages in the value chain, including right holders,
distributors, consumers, and academics. The questions elicited
widely diverging views on the best way to proceed. The "Green
Paper on Copyright in the Knowledge Economy" was followed up by
a Communication. The replies to the "Green Paper on the online
distribution of audiovisual works" have fed into subsequent
discussions on the Collective Rights Management Directive and
into the current review process.

How to submit replies to this questionnaire

You are kindly asked to send your repliesby 5 February 2014as a
word or pdf document to the following e-mail address of DG
Internal Market and
Services:markt-copyright-consultation@ec.europa.eu. Please note
that replies sent after that date will not be taken into
account.

This consultation is addressed to different categories of
stakeholders. To the extent possible, the questions indicate
the category/ies of respondents most likely to be concerned by
them (annotation in brackets, before the actual question).
Respondents should nevertheless feel free to reply to any/all
of the questions. Also, please note that, apart from the
question concerning the identification of the respondent, none
of the questions is obligatory. Replies containing answers only
to part of the questions will be also accepted.

You are requested to provide your answers directly within this
consultation document. For the “Yes/No/No opinion” questions
please put the selected answer inboldandunderlineit so it is
easy for us to see your selection.

In your answers to the questions, you are invited to refer to
the situation in EU Member States.You are also invited in
particular to indicate, where relevant, what would be the
impact of options you put forward in terms of costs,
opportunities and revenues.

The public consultation is available in English. Responses may,
however, be sent in any of the 24 official languages of the EU.


Confidentiality

The contributions received in this round of consultation as well
as a summary report presenting the responses in a statistical
and aggregated form will be published on the website of DG
MARKT.

Please note that all contributions received will be published
together with the identity of the contributor, unless the
contributor objects to the publication of their personal data
on the grounds that such publication would harm his or her
legitimate interests. In this case, the contribution will be
published in anonymous form upon the contributor's explicit
request. Otherwise the contribution will not be published nor
will its content be reflected in the summary report.

Pleaseread ourPrivacy statemHYPERLINK
"http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/consultations/2013/copyright-rules/docs/privacy-statement_en.pdf"eHYPERLINK
"http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/consultations/2013/copyright-rules/docs/privacy-statement_en.pdf"nt.

Please identify yourself:

Name:

João Pedro Pereira Bontempo Rasteiro

In the interests of transparency, organisations (including, for
example, NGOs, trade associations and commercial enterprises)
are invited to provide the public with relevant information
about themselves by registering in the Interest Representative
Register and subscribing to its Code of Conduct.

If you are a Registered organisation, please indicate your
Register ID number below. Your contribution will then be
considered as representing the views of your organisation.

…………………………………………………………………………………………………..

…………………………………………………………………………………………………..

If your organisation is not registered, you have the opportunity
toregHYPERLINK
"http://ec.europa.eu/transparencyregister/info/homePage.do"iHYPERLINK
"http://ec.europa.eu/transparencyregister/info/homePage.do"stHYPERLINK
"http://ec.europa.eu/transparencyregister/info/homePage.do"eHYPERLINK
"http://ec.europa.eu/transparencyregister/info/homePage.do"r
now. Responses from organisations not registered will be
published separately.

If you would like to submit your reply on an anonymous basis
please indicate it belowby underlining the following answer:

Yes, I would like to submit my reply on an anonymous basis

Type of respondent(Pleaseunderlinethe appropriate):

End user/consumer(e.g. internet user, reader, subscriber to
music or audiovisual service, researcher, student) OR
Representative of end users/consumers

àfor the purposes of this questionnaire normally referred to in
questions as"end users/consumers"

Institutional user(e.g. school, university, research centre,
library, archive)OR Representative of institutional users

àfor the purposes of this questionnaire normally referred to in
questions as"institutional users"

Author/Performer OR Representative of authors/performers

Publisher/Producer/Broadcaster OR Representative of
publishers/producers/broadcasters

àthe two above categoriesare,for the purposes of this
questionnaire, normally referred to in questions as"right
holders"

Intermediary/Distributor/Other service provider(e.g. online
music or audiovisual service, games platform, social media,
search engine, ICT industry)OR Representative of
intermediaries/distributors/other service providers

àfor the purposes of this questionnaire normally referred to in
questions as"service providers"

Collective Management Organisation

Public authority

Member State

Other(Please explain):

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Rights and the functioning of the Single Market

Why is it not possible to access many online content services
from anywhere in Europe?

[The territorial scope of the rights involved in digital
transmissions and the segmentation of the market through
licensing agreements]

Holders of copyright and related rights – e.g. writers, singers,
musicians - do not enjoy a single protection in the EU. Instead,
they are protected on the basis of a bundle of national rights
in each Member State. Those rights have been largely harmonised
by the existing EU Directives. However, differences remain and
the geographical scope of the rights is limited to the
territory of the Member State granting them. Copyright is thus
territorial in the sense that rights are acquired and enforced
on a country-by-country basis under national law.

The dissemination of copyright-protected content on the Internet
– e.g. by a music streaming service, or by an online e-book
seller – therefore requires, in principle, an authorisation for
each national territory in which the content is communicated to
the public. Rightholders are, of course, in a position to grant
a multi-territorial or pan-European licence, such that content
services can be provided in several Member States and across
borders. A number of steps have been taken at EU level to
facilitate multi-territorial licences: the proposal for a
Directive on Collective Rights Management should significantly
facilitate the delivery of multi-territorial licences in
musical works for online services; the structured stakeholder
dialogue “Licences for Europe” and market-led developments such
as the on-going work in the Linked Content Coalition.

"Licences for Europe" addressed in particular the specific issue
of cross-border portability, i.e. the ability of consumers
having subscribed to online services in their Member State to
keep accessing them when travelling temporarily to other Member
States. As a result, representatives of the audio-visual sector
issued a joint statement affirming their commitment to continue
working towards the further development of cross-border
portability.

Despite progress, there are continued problems with the
cross-border provision of, and access to, services. These
problems are most obvious to consumers wanting to access
services that are made available in Member States other than
the one in which they live. Not all online services are
available in all Member States and consumers face problems when
trying to access such services across borders. In some
instances, even if the “same” service is available in all
Member States, consumers cannot access the service across
borders (they can only access their “national” service, and if
they try to access the "same" service in another Member State
they are redirected to the one designated for their country of
residence).

This situation may in part stem from the territoriality of
rights and difficulties associated with the clearing of rights
in different territories. Contractual clauses in licensing
agreements between right holders and distributors and/or
between distributors and end users may also be at the origin of
some of the problems (denial of access, redirection).

The main issue at stake here is, therefore, whether further
measures (legislative or non-legislative, including market-led
solutions) need to be taken at EU level in the medium term to
increase the cross-border availability of content services in
the Single Market, while ensuring an adequate level of
protection for right holders.

[In particular if you are an end user/consumer:]Have you faced
problems when trying to access online services in an EU Member
State other than the one in which you live?

  YES - Please provide examples indicating the Member State,
the sector and the type of content concerned (e.g. premium
content such as certain films and TV series, audio-visual
content in general, music, e-books, magazines, journals and
newspapers, games, applications and other software)

Although this happens more frequently with content from the US,
some content in the UK, namely, videos on Youtube, do get
occasionally blocked and are impossible to view in my member
state (Portugal).

  NO

  NO OPINION

[In particular if you are a service provider:]Have you faced
problems when seeking to provide online services across borders
in the EU?

  YES - Please explain whether such problems, in your
experience, are related to copyright or to other issues (e.g.
business decisions relating to the cost of providing services
across borders, compliance with other laws such as consumer
protection)? Please provide examples indicating the Member
State, the sector and the type of content concerned (e.g.
premium content such as certain films and TV series,
audio-visual content in general, music, e-books, magazines,
journals and newspapers, games, applications and other
software).

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

  NO

  NO OPINION

[In particular if you are a right holder or a collective
management organisation:]How often are you asked to grant
multi-territorial licences? Please indicate, if possible, the
number of requests per year and provide examples indicating the
Member State, the sector and the type of content concerned.

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

If you have identified problems in the answers to any of the
questions above – what would be the best way to tackle them?

[Open question]

A simple and effective way to tackle these problems is to remove
such limitations in the digital marketplace. Due to the open
nature of the internet, these type of artificial, digital
borders not only go against the concept of internet but also
make the expansion and propagation of content and services
slower and more limited.

[In particular if you are a right holder or a collective
management organisation:]Are there reasons why, even in cases
where you hold all the necessary rights for all the territories
in question, you would still find it necessary or justified to
impose territorial restrictions on a service provider (in
order, for instance, to ensure that access to certain content
is not possible in certain European countries)?

  YES – Please explain by giving examples

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

  NO

  NO OPINION

[In particular if you are e.g. a broadcaster or a service
provider:]Are there reasons why, even in cases where you have
acquired all the necessary rights for all the territories in
question, you would still find it necessary or justified to
impose territorial restrictions on the service recipient (in
order for instance, to redirect the consumer to a different
website than the one he is trying to access)?

  YES – Please explain by giving examples

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

  NO

  NO OPINION

Do you think that further measures (legislative or
non-legislative, including market-led solutions) are needed at
EU level to increase the cross-border availability of content
services in the Single Market, while ensuring an adequate level
of protection for right holders?

  YES – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

  NO – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

  NO OPINION

Is there a need for more clarity as regards the scope of what
needs to be authorised (or not) in digital transmissions?

[The definition of the rights involved in digital transmissions]

The EU framework for the protection of copyright and related
rights in the digital environment is largely established by
Directive 2001/29/EC on the harmonisation of certain aspects of
copyright and related rights in the information society. Other
EU directives in this field that are relevant in the online
environment are those relating to the protection of software
and databases.

Directive 2001/29/EC harmonises the rights of authors and
neighbouring rightholders which are essential for the
transmission of digital copies of works (e.g. an e-book) and
other protected subject matter (e.g. a record in a MP3 format)
over the internet or similar digital networks.

The most relevant rights for digital transmissions are the
reproduction right, i.e. the right to authorise or prohibit the
making of copies, (notably relevant at the start of the
transmission – e.g. the uploading of a digital copy of a work
to a server in view of making it available – and at the users’
end – e.g. when a user downloads a digital copy of a work) and
the communication to the public/making available right, i.e.
the rights to authorise or prohibit the dissemination of the
works in digital networks. These rights are intrinsically
linked in digital transmissions and both need to be cleared.

The act of “making available”

Directive 2001/29/EC specifies neitherwhatis covered by the
making available right (e.g. the upload, the accessibility by
the public, the actual reception by the public) norwherethe act
of “making available” takes place. This does not raise questions
if the act is limited to a single territory. Questions arise
however when the transmission covers several territories and
rights need to be cleared (does the act of "making available"
happen in the country of the upload only? in each of the
countries where the content is potentially accessible? in each
of the countries where the content is effectively accessed?).
The most recent case law of the Court of Justice of the
European Union (CJEU) suggests that a relevant criterion is the
“targeting” of a certain Member State's public. According to
this approach the copyright-relevant act (which has to be
licensed) occurs at least in those countries which are
“targeted” by the online service provider. A service provider
“targets” a group of customers residing in a specific country
when it directs its activity to that group, e.g. via
advertisement, promotions, a language or a currency
specifically targeted at that group.

Is the scope of the “making available” right in cross-border
situations – i.e. when content is disseminated across borders –
sufficiently clear?

  YES

  NO – Please explain how this could be clarified and what type
of clarification would be required (e.g. as in "targeting"
approach explained above, as in "country of origin" approach)

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

  NO OPINION

[In particular if you are a right holder:]Could a clarification
of the territorial scope of the “making available” right have
an effect on the recognition of your rights (e.g. whether you
are considered to be an author or not, whether you are
considered to have transferred your rights or not), on your
remuneration, or on the enforcement of rights (including the
availability of injunctive relief)?

  YES – Please explain how such potential effects could be
addressed

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

  NO

  NO OPINION

Two rights involved in a single act of exploitation

Each act of transmission in digital networks entails (in the
current state of technology and law) several reproductions.
This means that there are two rights that apply to digital
transmissions: the reproduction right and the making available
right. This may complicate the licensing of works for online
use notably when the two rights are held by different
persons/entities.

[In particular if you a service provider or a right holder:]Does
the application of two rights to a single act of economic
exploitation in the online environment (e.g. a download) create
problems for you?

  YES – Please explain what type of measures would be needed in
order to address such problems (e.g. facilitation of joint
licences when the rights are in different hands, legislation to
achieve the "bundling of rights")

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

  NO

  NO OPINION

Linking and browsing

Hyperlinks are references to data that lead a user from one
location in the Internet to another. They are indispensable for
the functioning of the Internet as a network. Several cases are
pending before the CJEU in which the question has been raised
whether the provision of a clickable link constitutes an act of
communication to the public/making available to the public
subject to the authorisation of the rightholder.

A user browsing the internet (e.g. viewing a web-page) regularly
creates temporary copies of works and other subject-matter
protected under copyright on the screen and in the 'cache'
memory of his computer. A question has been referred to the
CJEU as to whether such copies are always covered by the
mandatory exception for temporary acts of reproduction provided
for in Article 5(1) of Directive 2001/29/EC.

Should the provision of a hyperlink leading to a work or other
subject matter protected under copyright, either in general or
under specific circumstances, be subject to the authorisation
of the rightholder?

  YES – Please explain whether you consider this to be the case
in general, or under specific circumstances, and why

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

  NO – Please explain whether you consider this to be the case
in general, or under specific circumstances, and why (e.g.
because it does not amount to an act of communication to the
public – or to a new public, or because it should be covered by
a copyright exception)

The core purpose and ideal of the Internet is to share
information and allow people to link to resources. Blocking or
limiting the ability to link to resources on the internet is
both impracticable, due to the model it was built around, and
unacceptable because of it's inherent nature which revolves in
the exact opposite. This has become even more visible with the
appearance and growth of social networks whose sole purpose is
to share and link content between as many people as possible.
Instead of limiting measures that would break the internet,
right holders should consciously think if they want to publish
their content online or rather think of a business model that
fits with the way the internet works, rather than subverting an
existing system to a business model that relied on different,
less efficient, distribution methods that pre-date the
internet.

  NO OPINION

Should the viewing of a web-page where this implies the
temporary reproduction of a work or other subject matter
protected under copyright on the screen and in the cache memory
of the user’s computer, either in general or under specific
circumstances, be subject to the authorisation of the
rightholder?

  YES – Please explain whether you consider this to be the case
in general, or under specific circumstances, and why

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

  NO – Please explain whether you consider this to be the case
in general, or under specific circumstances, and why (e.g.
because it is or should be covered by a copyright exception)

The limited (or not) time that a file remains in a computer's
disk doesn't change the nature of its contents or its data. The
caching of files is just an efficient way for browsers to keep
useful data only while its needed and requiring authorization
in order to cache some data is no different than having to
request authorization to access a resource through an
hyperlink, since the end result of any browser's working would
be the same. And on both situations, the enforcement of such
restrictions would severely halt the way the internet works and
break its structure or severely hurt its usefulness and
effectiveness. Furthermore, such a type of restrictions and
bureaucracy would be unmanageable due to the high amount of
content shared and access on a daily basis. Finally it would be
virtually impossible for users to know whether the content they
were accessing was in need of an authorization or not. These
types of limitations are a direct attack at a citizen's right
to receive and impart information.

  NO OPINION

Download to own digital content

Digital content is increasingly being bought via digital
transmission (e.g. download to own). Questions arise as to the
possibility for users to dispose of the files they buy in this
manner (e.g. by selling them or by giving them as a gift). The
principle of EU exhaustion of the distribution right applies in
the case of the distribution of physical copies (e.g. when a
tangible article such as a CD or a book, etc. is sold, the
right holder cannot prevent the further distribution of that
tangible article). The issue that arises here is whether this
principle can also be applied in the case of an act of
transmission equivalent in its effect to distribution
(i.e. where the buyer acquires the property of the copy). This
raises difficult questions, notably relating to the practical
application of such an approach (how to avoid re-sellers
keeping and using a copy of a work after they have “re-sold” it
– this is often referred to as the “forward and delete”
question) as well as to the economic implications of the
creation of a second-hand market of copies of perfect quality
that never deteriorate (in contrast to the second-hand market
for physical goods).

[In particular if you are an end user/consumer:]Have you faced
restrictions when trying to resell digital files that you have
purchased (e.g. mp3 file, e-book)?

  YES – Please explain by giving examples

Due to the way games are currently sold digitally it is
virtually impossible to resell them. DRM forbidding one to
access their own purchased content without an online conection
(despite the files being stored offline) and even copying to a
second computer are common and restrictive. However, I can
resell physical copies of games purchased 'offline' even when
digital copies of the same game bought at later dates do not
allow it. The same restrictions apply not only to games but
also e-books and movies.

  NO

  NO OPINION

[In particular if you are a right holder or a service provider:]
What would be the consequences of providing a legal framework
enabling the resale of previously purchased digital content?
Please specify per market (type of content) concerned.

[Open question]

Given the fact that there is no inherent difference in the
content and experience provided by offline and online goods,
the rights regarding both types of content should be equal.
Therefore digital resale must be recognized in the law. This
also has the consequence of improving customer choice which
will then be able to purchase 2nd hand digital goods for a
lower price.

Registration of works and other subject matter – is it a good
idea?

Registration is not often discussed in copyright in the EU as
the existing international treaties in the area prohibit
formalities as a condition for the protection and exercise of
rights. However, this prohibition is not absolute. Moreover a
system of registration does not need to be made compulsory or
constitute a precondition for the protection and exercise of
rights. With a longer term of protection and with the increased
opportunities that digital technology provides for the use of
content (including older works and works that otherwise would
not have been disseminated), the advantages and disadvantages
of a system of registration are increasingly being considered.

Would the creation of a registration system at EU level help in
the identification and licensing of works and other subject
matter?

  YES

  NO

  NO OPINION

What would be the possible advantages of such a system?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

What would be the possible disadvantages of such a system?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

What incentives for registration by rightholders could be
envisaged?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

How to improve the use and interoperability of identifiers

There are many private databases of works and other subject
matter held by producers, collective management organisations,
and institutions such as libraries, which are based to
a greater or lesser extent on the use of (more or less)
interoperable, internationally agreed ‘identifiers’.
Identifiers can be compared to a reference number embedded in a
work, are specific to the sector in which they have been
developed, and identify, variously, the work itself, the owner
or the contributor to a work or other subject matter. There are
notable examples of where industry is undertaking actions to
improve the interoperability of such identifiers and databases.
The Global Repertoire Database should, once operational, provide
a single source of information on the ownership and control of
musical works worldwide. The Linked Content Coalition was
established to develop building blocks for the expression and
management of rights and licensing across all content and media
types. It includes the development of a Rights Reference Model
(RRM) – a comprehensive data model for all types of rights in
all types of content. The UK Copyright Hub is seeking to take
such identification systems a step further, and to create a
linked platform, enabling automated licensing across different
sectors.

What should be the role of the EU in promoting the adoption
of identifiers in the content sector, and in promoting the
development and interoperability of rights ownership and
permissions databases?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Term of protection – is it appropriate?

Works and other subject matter are protected under copyright for
a limited period of time. After the term of protection has
expired, a work falls into the public domain and can be freely
used by anyone (in accordance with the applicable national
rules on moral rights). The Berne Convention requires a minimum
term of protection of 50 years after the death of the author.
The EU rules extend this term of protection to 70 years after
the death of the author (as do many other countries, e.g. the
US).

With regard to performers in the music sector and phonogram
producers, the term provided for in the EU rules also extend 20
years beyond what is mandated in international agreements,
providing for a term of protection of 70 years after the first
publication. Performers and producers in the audio-visual
sector, however, do not benefit from such an extended term of
protection.

Are the current terms of copyright protection still appropriate
in the digital environment?

  YES – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

  NO – Please explain if they should be longer or shorter

Copyright protection has grown out of proportion. Given the fact
that copyright exists to benefit society by giving an incentive
to people to create, it makes little sense that copyright
protects content up to 70 years after an author's death, a
point at which no amount of incentive will make the author
create anything else. Exceedingly long copyright protection
terms will ensure that there will be a void of culture as time
grows and older creations cannot be reinvented, parodied nor
shared (especially when sometimes it is no longer profitable
for the author to keep distributing the work) which leads to
the creation being forgotten and/or lost. Since most artists
get the vast majority of the profit from their works in the
first 5 years, it would make sense to reduce copyright's
duration to 5~7 years with a possible (paid) extension to 10~12
years. Since the difference between the (possible) more than 100
years protection and the proposed duration would be too great,
copyright's duration could be reduced to 50 years, as stated in
the Berne convention as a transitive measure for the first few
years, and then reduced further to the mentioned values.
Society as a whole stands to benefit from lower copyright
durations. An example of such is Walt Disney who managed to
create new, great stories based on existing stories available
in the public domain at the time. Refusing similar creative
'booms' by then restricting those works for more than 100 years
seems counter intuitive and hypocritical.

  NO OPINION

Limitations and exceptions in the Single Market

Limitations and exceptions to copyright and related rights
enable the use of works and other protected subject-matter,
without obtaining authorisation from the rightholders, for
certain purposes and to a certain extent (for instance the use
for illustration purposes of an extract from a novel by a
teacher in a literature class). At EU level they are
established in a number of copyright directives, most notably
Directive 2001/29/EC.

Exceptions and limitations in the national and EU copyright laws
have to respect international law. In accordance with
international obligations, the EU acquis requires that
limitations and exceptions can only be applied in certain
special cases which do not conflict with a normal exploitation
of the work or other subject matter and do not unreasonably
prejudice the legitimate interest of the rightholders.

Whereas the catalogue of limitations and exceptions included in
EU law is exhaustive (no other exceptions can be applied to the
rights harmonised at EU level), these limitations and exceptions
are often optional, in the sense that Member States are free to
reflect in national legislation as many or as few of them as
they wish. Moreover, the formulation of certain of the
limitations and exceptions is general enough to give
significant flexibility to the Member States as to how, and to
what extent, to implement them (if they decide to do so).
Finally, it is worth noting that not all of the limitations and
exceptions included in the EU legal framework for copyright are
of equivalent significance in policy terms and in terms of
their potential effect on the functioning of the Single Market.


In addition, in the same manner that the definition of the
rights is territorial (i.e. has an effect only within the
territory of the Member State), the definition of the
limitations and exceptions to the rights is territorial too (so
an act that is covered by an exception in a Member State "A" may
still require the authorisation of the rightholder once we move
to the Member State "B").

The cross-border effect of limitations and exceptions also
raises the question of fair compensation of rightholders. In
some instances, Member States are obliged to compensate
rightholders for the harm inflicted on them by a limitation or
exception to their rights. In other instances Member States are
not obliged, but may decide, to provide for such compensation.
If a limitation or exception triggering a mechanism of fair
compensation were to be given cross-border effect (e.g. the
books are used for illustration in an online course given by an
university in a Member State "A" and the students are in a
Member State "B") then there would also be a need to clarify
which national law should determine the level of that
compensation and who should pay it.

Finally, the question of flexibility and adaptability is being
raised: what is the best mechanism to ensure that the EU and
Member States’ regulatory frameworks adapt when necessary
(either to clarify that certain uses are covered by an
exception or to confirm that for certain uses the authorisation
of rightholders is required)? The main question here is whether
a greater degree of flexibility can be introduced in the EU and
Member States regulatory framework while ensuring the required
legal certainty, including for the functioning of the Single
Market, and respecting the EU's international obligations.

Are there problems arising from the fact that most limitations
and exceptions provided in the EU copyright directives are
optional for the Member States?

  YES – Please explain by referring to specific cases

The optional factor of such directives makes it so that each
country has a different set of actions that are considered
illegal. Given the borderless nature of the internet it is
possible that content shared between two people on separate
member states may end up doing something that is legal for one
of them and illegal for the other. This situation can be
confusing, requiring each citizen to know the laws of many
other countries, and brings a chilling effect when it comes to
sharing. Especially on the countries where copyright is more
strict. Another fundamental change that should be made is the
reversal of the requirements by which copyright falls under.
Exceptions should not be the cases where copyright is not
applied but the opposite instead. An exception should be the
case in which copyright is to be enforced and the (majority of
) cases where it does not, should be the norm.

  NO – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

  NO OPINION

Should some/all of the exceptions be made mandatory and, if so,
is there a need for a higher level of harmonisation of such
exceptions?

  YES – Please explain by referring to specific cases

As mentioned in the previous point, all the EU countries should
abide by the same rules and have the same exceptions and these
exceptions should be made mandatory.

  NO – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

  NO OPINION

Should any new limitations and exceptions be added to or removed
from the existing catalogue?Please explain by referring to
specific cases.

[Open question]

No exceptions should be removed. The chilling effects caused by
excessively intrusive copyright laws are already clear and
clashing with well established and working internet concepts to
the point where some services (like search engines) are losing
quality. Exceptions should be added and made mandatory to
increase the possibilities and creative throughput of the
internet users. At the same time, a critical number of current
limitations should be removed. More specifically, adding
flexibility in the 'fair use' principle where news and parodies
(among other uses) are (and should be) allowed without
restrictions. Also the sharing of one's files with other
citizens and other similar non-commercial uses should be
allowed. This type of sharing is key to the Internet's
continuing good health and can even be positive as more
information becomes accessible and content creators can reach a
bigger audience through unrestricted sharing. This is already
possible in a few EU countries and there is no reason why other
members shouldn't adhere to similar practices. It is also
important that content creators shouldn't be afraid to mix,
remix, change and create new content based on existing
creations due to existing limitations. Such limitations would
only lower the creative output of many artists who start out
experimenting in such way and slowly develop their own unique
content and 'style' as they grow.

Independently from the questions above, is there a need to
provide for a greater degree of flexibility in the EU
regulatory framework for limitations and exceptions?

  YES – Please explain why

Although the framework currently offers some degree of
flexibility, the number of exceptions is narrow and designed
for a technological landscape that is totally incompatible with
the current technological landscape. The appearance of social
networks and the growth of a sharing culture on the internet
requires that copyright is made the exception and not the norm.
That is, that creative works only fall under copyright as an
exception. This measure by itself would also ease the
enforcement of copyright law. The fact that a simple link on
reddit or a facebook post or video or even a link on a comment
section can be considered illegal is in direct clash with the
sharing culture that appeared and took over the internet with
these type of platforms.

  NO – Please explain why

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

  NO OPINION

If yes, what would be the best approach to provide for
flexibility? (e.g. interpretation by national courts and the
ECJ, periodic revisions of the directives, interpretations by
the Commission, built-in flexibility, e.g. in the form of a
fair-use or fair dealing provision / open norm, etc.)? Please
explain indicating what would be the relative advantages and
disadvantages of such an approach as well as its possible
effects on the functioning of the Internal Market.

[Open question]

Flexibility should be attained by ensuring that copyright cases
are interpreted according to a list of general and mandatory
rules that don't change between countries but also that each
case is analysed and interpreted along with other similar
cases. These more general set of rules would allow for
flexibility and better shaping of rules to future and changing
situations. Advantages of more broad approach range from a
better and faster adaptability and a 'self-updating'
legislation that will be innovation and change-friendly.
Disadvantages would be the need for courts to define the
initial set of 'allowed' actions as the broader rules are
interpreted at the early stages. This effect could be minimised
with a starting set of "acceptable policies" or directives that
would reflect the general consensus regarding copyright.

Does the territoriality of limitations and exceptions, in your
experience, constitute a problem?

  YES – Please explain why and specify which exceptions you are
referring to

Imposing limitations based on geographical location on a service
that exists beyond borders is counter intuitive. The added fact
that each country can choose to implement more strict or
lenient measures further adds confusion and complexity to this
issue. A few critical examples of this is the absence of a
private copy exception in the UK but its existance in Portugal
or Spain. This effectively stalls the sharing of information,
from both a cultural and a scientific point of view. That is,
people of different countries may be deterred from sharing both
culture and scientific works.

  NO – Please explain why and specify which exceptions you are
referring to

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

  NO OPINION

In the event that limitations and exceptions established at
national level were to have cross-border effect, how should the
question of “fair compensation” be addressed, when such
compensation is part of the exception? (e.g. who pays whom,
where?)

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Access to content in libraries and archives

Directive 2001/29/EC enables Member States to reflect in their
national law a range of limitations and exceptions for the
benefit of publicly accessible libraries, educational
establishments and museums, as well as archives. If
implemented, these exceptions allow acts of preservation and
archivingand enable on-site consultation of the works and other
subject matter in the collections of such institutions. The
public lending (under an exception or limitation) by these
establishments of physical copies of works and other subject
matter is governed by the Rental and Lending Directive.

Questions arise as to whether the current framework continues to
achieve the objectives envisaged or whether it needs to be
clarified or updated to cover use in digital networks. At the
same time, questions arise as to the effect of such a possible
expansion on the normal exploitation of works and other subject
matter and as to the prejudice this may cause to rightholders.
The role of licensing and possible framework agreements between
different stakeholders also needs to be considered here.

Preservation and archiving

The preservation of the copies of works or other subject-matter
held in the collections of cultural establishments (e.g. books,
records, or films) – the restoration or replacement of works,
the copying of fragile works - may involve the creation of
another copy/ies of these works or other subject matter. Most
Member States provide for an exception in their national laws
allowing for the making of such preservation copies. The scope
of the exception differs from Member State to Member State (as
regards the type of beneficiary establishments, the types of
works/subject-matter covered by the exception, the mode of
copying and the number of reproductions that a beneficiary
establishment may make). Also, the current legal status of new
types of preservation activities (e.g. harvesting and archiving
publicly available web content) is often uncertain.

(a)[In particular if you are an institutional user:]Have you
experienced specific problems when trying to use an exception
to preserve and archive specific works or other subject matter
in your collection?

(b)[In particular if you are a right holder:]Have you
experienced problems with the use by libraries, educational
establishments, museum or archives of the preservation
exception?

  YES – Please explain, by Member State, sector, and the type
of use in question.

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

  NO

  NO OPINION

If there are problems, how would they best be solved?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

If your view is that a legislative solution is needed, what
would be its main elements? Which activities of the beneficiary
institutions should be covered and under which conditions?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

If your view is that a different solution is needed, what would
it be?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Off-premises access to library collections

Directive 2001/29/EC provides an exception for the consultation
of works and other subject-matter (consulting an e-book,
watching a documentary) via dedicated terminals on the premises
of such establishments for the purpose of research and private
study. The online consultation of works and other
subject-matter remotely (i.e. when the library user is not on
the premises of the library) requires authorisation and is
generally addressed in agreements between
universities/libraries and publishers. Some argue that the law
rather than agreements should provide for the possibility to,
and the conditions for, granting online access to collections.

(a)[In particular if you are an institutional user:]Have you
experienced specific problems when trying to negotiate
agreements with rights holders that enable you to provide
remote access, including across borders,to your collections (or
parts thereof) for purposes of research and private study?

(b)[In particular if you are an end user/consumer:]Have you
experienced specific problems when trying to consult, including
across borders, works and other subject-matter held in the
collections of institutions such as universities and national
libraries when you are not on the premises of the institutions
in question?

(c)[In particular if you are aright holder:]Have you negotiated
agreements with institutional users that enable those
institutions to provide remote access, including across
borders,to the works or other subject-matter in their
collections, for purposes of research and private study?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

If there are problems, how would they best be solved?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

If your view is that a legislative solution is needed, what
would be its main elements? Which activities of the beneficiary
institutions should be covered and under which conditions?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

If your view is that a different solution is needed, what would
it be?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

E – lending

Traditionally, public libraries have loaned physical copies of
works (i.e. books, sometimes also CDs and DVDs) to their users.
Recent technological developments have made it technically
possible for libraries to provide users with temporary access
to digital content, such as e-books, music or films via
networks. Under the current legal framework, libraries need to
obtain the authorisation of the rights holders to organise such
e-lending activities. In various Member States, publishers and
libraries are currently experimenting with different business
models for the making available of works online, including
direct supply of e-books to libraries by publishers or bundling
by aggregators.

(a)[In particular if you are alibrary:]Have you experienced
specific problems when trying to negotiate agreements to enable
the electronic lending (e-lending), including across borders, of
books or other materials held in your collection?

(b)[In particular if you are an end user/consumer:]Have you
experienced specific problems when trying to borrow books or
other materials electronically (e-lending), including across
borders, from institutions such as public libraries?

(c)[In particular if you are aright holder:]Have you negotiated
agreements with libraries to enable them to lend books or other
materials electronically, including across borders?

  YES – Please explain with specific examples

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

  NO

  NO OPINION

If there are problems, how would they best be solved?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

The following two questions are relevant both to this point (n°
3) and the previous one (n° 2).

[In particular if you are an institutional user:]What
differences do you see in the management of physical and online
collections, including providing access to your subscribers?
What problems have you encountered?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

[In particular if you are a right holder:]What difference do you
see between libraries’ traditional activities such as
on-premises consultation or public lending and activities such
as off-premises (online, at a distance) consultation and
e-lending? What problems have you encountered?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Mass digitisation

The term “mass digitisation” is normally used to refer to
efforts by institutions such as libraries and archives to
digitise (e.g. scan) the entire content or part of their
collections with an objective to preserve these collections
and, normally, to make them available to the public.Examples
are efforts by libraries to digitise novels form the early part
of the 20thcentury or whole collections of pictures of
historical value. This matter has been partly addressed at the
EU level by the 2011 Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) on key
principles on the digitisation and making available of out
of commerce works (i.e. works which are no longer found in the
normal channels of commerce), which is aiming to facilitate mass
digitisation efforts (for books and learned journals) on the
basis of licence agreements between libraries and similar
cultural institutions on the one hand and the collecting
societies representing authors and publishers on the other.
Provided the required funding is ensured (digitisation projects
are extremely expensive), the result of this MoU should be that
books that are currently to be found only in the archives of,
for instance, libraries will be digitised and made available
online to everyone. The MoU is based on voluntary licences
(granted by Collective Management Organisations on the basis of
the mandates they receive from authors and publishers). Some
Member States may need to enact legislation to ensure the
largest possible effect of such licences (e.g. by establishing
in legislation a presumption of representation of a collecting
society or the recognition of an “extended effect” to the
licences granted).

[In particular if you are an institutional user,engaging or
wanting to engage in mass digitisation projects, a right
holder, a collective management organisation:]Would it be
necessary in your country to enact legislation to ensure that
the results of the 2011 MoU (i.e. the agreements concluded
between libraries and collecting societies) have a cross-border
effect so that out of commerce works can be accessed across the
EU?

  YES – Please explain why and how it could best be achieved

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

  NO – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

  NO OPINION

Would it be necessary to develop mechanisms, beyond those
already agreed for other types of content (e.g. for audio- or
audio-visual collections, broadcasters’ archives)?

  YES – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

  NO – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

  NO OPINION

Teaching

Directive 2001/29/EC enables Member States to implement in their
national legislation limitations and exceptions for the purpose
of illustration for non-commercial teaching. Such exceptions
would typically allow a teacher to use parts of or full works
to illustrate his course, e.g. by distributing copies of
fragments of a book or of newspaper articles in the classroom
or by showing protected content on a smart board without having
to obtain authorisation from the right holders. The open
formulation of this (optional) provision allows for rather
different implementation at Member States level. The
implementation of the exception differs from Member State to
Member State, with several Member States providing instead a
framework for the licensing of content for certain educational
uses. Some argue that the law should provide for better
possibilities for distance learning and study at home.

(a)[In particular if you are an end user/consumer or an
institutional user:]Have you experienced specific problems when
trying to use works or other subject-matter for illustration for
teaching, including across borders?

(b)[In particular if you are a right holder:]Have you
experienced specific problems resulting from the way in which
works or other subject-matter are used for illustration for
teaching, including across borders?

  YES – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

  NO

  NO OPINION

If there are problems, how would they best be solved?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

What mechanisms exist in the market place to facilitate the use
of content for illustration for teaching purposes? How
successful are they?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

If your view is that a legislative solution is needed, what
would be its main elements? Which activities of the beneficiary
institutions should be covered and under what conditions?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

If your view is that a different solution is needed, what would
it be?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Research

Directive 2001/29/EC enables Member States to choose whether to
implement in their national laws a limitation for the purpose
of non-commercial scientific research. The open formulation of
this (optional) provision allows for rather different
implementations at Member States level.

(a)[In particular if you are an end user/consumer or an
institutional user:]Have you experienced specific problems when
trying to use works or other subject matter in the context of
research projects/activities, including across borders?

(b)[In particular if you are a right holder:]Have you
experienced specific problems resulting from the way in which
works or other subject-matter are used in the context of
research projects/activities, including across borders?

  YES – Please explain

When performing research for non-profit scientific works at
universities it is often the case that the biggest portion of
scientific works are inaccessible or very limited unless the
researcher spends a high amount of money per paper (sometimes
200~300+€) despite the non-profit context of the project.

  NO

  NO OPINION

If there are problems, how would they best be solved?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

What mechanisms exist in the Member States to facilitate the use
of content for research purposes? How successful are they?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Disabilities

Directive 2001/29/EC provides for an exception/limitation for
the benefit of people with a disability. The open formulation
of this (optional) provision allows for rather different
implementations at Member States level. At EU and international
level projects have been launched to increase the accessibility
of works and other subject-matter for persons with disabilities
(notably by increasing the number of works published in special
formats and facilitating their distribution across the European
Union).

The Marrakesh Treaty has been adopted to facilitate access to
published works for persons who are blind, visually impaired,
or otherwise print disabled. The Treaty creates a mandatory
exception to copyright that allows organisations for the blind
to produce, distribute and make available accessible format
copies to visually impaired persons without the authorisation
of the rightholders. The EU and its Member States have started
work to sign and ratify the Treaty. This may require the
adoption of certain provisions at EU level (e.g. to ensure the
possibility to exchange accessible format copies across
borders).

(a)[In particular if you are a person with a disability or an
organisation representing persons with disabilities:]Have you
experienced problems with accessibility to content, including
across borders, arising from Member States’ implementation of
this exception?

(b)[In particular if you are an organisation providing services
for persons with disabilities:]Have you experienced problems
when distributing/communicating works published in special
formats across the EU?

(c)[In particular if you are a right holder:]Have you
experienced specific problems resulting from the application of
limitations or exceptions allowing for the
distribution/communication of works published in special
formats, including across borders?

  YES – Please explain by giving examples

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

  NO

  NO OPINION

If there are problems, what could be done to improve
accessibility?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

What mechanisms exist in the market place to facilitate
accessibility to content? How successful are they?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Text and data mining

Text and data mining/content mining/data analytics are different
terms used to describe increasingly important techniques used in
particular by researchers for the exploration of vast amounts of
existing texts and data (e.g., journals, web sites, databases
etc.). Through the use of software or other automated
processes, an analysis is made of relevant texts and data in
order to obtain new insights, patterns and trends.

The texts and data used for mining are either freely accessible
on the internet or accessible through subscriptions to e.g.
journals and periodicals that give access to the databases of
publishers. A copy is made of the relevant texts and data (e.g.
on browser cache memories or in computers RAM memories or onto
the hard disk of a computer), prior to the actual analysis.
Normally, it is considered that to mine protected works or
other subject matter, it is necessary to obtain authorisation
from the right holders for the making of such copies unless
such authorisation can be implied (e.g. content accessible to
general public without restrictions on the internet, open
access).

Some argue that the copies required for text and data mining are
covered by the exception for temporary copies in Article 5.1 of
Directive 2001/29/EC. Others consider that text and data mining
activities should not even be seen as covered by copyright. None
of this is clear, in particular since text and data mining does
not consist only of a single method, but can be undertaken in
several different ways. Important questions also remain as to
whether the main problems arising in relation to this issue go
beyond copyright (i.e. beyond the necessity or not to obtain
the authorisation to use content) and relate rather to the need
to obtain “access” to content (i.e. being able to use e.g.
commercial databases).

A specific Working Group was set up on this issue in the
framework of the "Licences for Europe" stakeholder dialogue. No
consensus was reached among participating stakeholders on either
the problems to be addressed or the results. At the same time,
practical solutions to facilitate text and data mining of
subscription-based scientific content were presented by
publishers as an outcome of “Licences for Europe”. In the
context of these discussions, other stakeholders argued that no
additional licences should be required to mine material to which
access has been provided through a subscription agreement and
considered that a specific exception for text and data mining
should be introduced, possibly on the basis of a distinction
between commercial and non-commercial.

(a)[In particular if you are an end user/consumer or an
institutional user:]Have you experienced obstacles, linked to
copyright, when trying to use text or data mining methods,
including across borders?

(b)[In particular if you are a service provider:]Have you
experienced obstacles, linked to copyright, when providing
services based on text or data mining methods, including across
borders?

(c)[In particular if you are a right holder:]Have you
experienced specific problems resulting from the use of text
and data mining in relation to copyright protected content,
including across borders?

  YES – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

  NO – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

  NO OPINION

If there are problems, how would they best be solved?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

If your view is that a legislative solution is needed, what
would be its main elements? Which activities should be covered
and under what conditions?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

If your view is that a different solution is needed, what would
it be?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Are there other issues, unrelated to copyright, that constitute
barriers to the use of text or data mining methods?

[Open question] ……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

User-generated content

Technological and service developments mean that citizens can
copy, use and distribute content at little to no financial
cost. As a consequence, new types of online activities are
developing rapidly, including the making of so-called
“user-generated content”. While users can create totally
original content, they can also take one or several
pre-existing works, change something in the work(s), and upload
the result on the Internet e.g. to platforms and blogs.
User-generated content (UGC) can thus cover the modification of
pre-existing works even if the newly-generated/"uploaded" work
does not necessarily require a creative effort and results from
merely adding, subtracting or associating some pre-existing
content with other pre-existing content. This kind of activity
is not “new” as such. However, the development of social
networking and social media sites that enable users to share
content widely has vastly changed the scale of such activities
and increased the potential economic impact for those holding
rights in the pre-existing works. Re-use is no longer the
preserve of a technically and artistically adept elite. With
the possibilities offered by the new technologies, re-use is
open to all, at no cost. This in turn raises questions with
regard to fundamental rights such the freedom of expression and
the right to property.

A specific Working Group was set up on this issue in the
framework of the "Licences for Europe" stakeholder dialogue. No
consensus was reached among participating stakeholders on either
the problems to be addressed or the results or even the
definition of UGC. Nevertheless, a wide range of views were
presented as to the best way to respond to this phenomenon. One
view was to say that a new exception is needed to cover UGC, in
particular non-commercial activities by individuals such as
combining existing musical works with videos, sequences of
photos, etc. Another view was that no legislative change is
needed: UGC is flourishing, and licensing schemes are
increasingly available (licence schemes concluded between
rightholders and platforms as well as micro-licences concluded
between rightholders and the users generating the content. In
any event, practical solutions to ease user-generated content
and facilitate micro-licensing for small users were pledged by
rightholders across different sectors as a result of the
“Licences for Europe” discussions.

(a)[In particular if you are an end user/consumer:]Have you
experienced problems when trying to use pre-existing works or
other subject matter to disseminate new content on the
Internet, including across borders?

(b)[In particular if you are a service provider:]Have you
experienced problems when users publish/disseminate new content
based on the pre-existing works or other subject-matter through
your service, including across borders?

(c)[In particular if you are a right holder:]Have you
experienced problems resulting from the way the users are using
pre-existing works or other subject-matter to disseminate new
content on the Internet, including across borders?

  YES – Please explain by giving examples

As an end user/consumer It is nearly impossible to publicly
share, even though I do so in a non-commercial environment,
remixes, mashups and even parodies of other works. Even when
the there are clear creative differences in the resulting work
for to be qualified as something new. The same applies to
myself as a content creator where, because of past situations
where this has happened, I now refuse to publish some works due
to the remix / mashup limitation as it is just too much of a
hassle. It's simply easier (and safer) to distribute it
privately to a very limited number of people who you know that
won't pass it along. However, the consequences of such
limitations is a clear intrusion in freedom of creative
expression which results in a severe hit in creative culture
across Europe. A measure like the US's fair use policy could
help, although the way it is handled currently where content is
taken down regardless and then only brought back online once the
creator proves his innocence by bringing Fair Use to his defence
is also a problem since it assumes a reversal of the burden of
proof. So a better solution would be to implement a similar
measure to the Fair Use policy but that is handled and enforced
in a better way that doesn't interfere with people's liberties
and too often risks wrongful take downs like in the US.

  NO

  NO OPINION

(a)[In particular if you are an end user/consumer or a right
holder:]Have you experienced problems when trying to ensure
that the work you have created (on the basis of pre-existing
works) is properly identified for online use? Are proprietary
systems sufficient in this context?

(b)[In particular if you are a service provider:]Do you provide
possibilities for users that are publishing/disseminating the
works they have created (on the basis of pre-existing works)
through your service to properly identify these works for
online use?

  YES – Please explain

Despite claiming that my work is a parody (and identifying and
even linking to the original as credit), I have had content
removed on copyright grounds. Proprietary systems are clearly
not sufficient in this context as they are too prone to
failure. The problem arises exactly because such automated
systems are based on samples and are unable to take remixing,
mashing up or parodying into account. Furthermore these systems
shoot first and ask questions later, and often times with enough
delay to severely hurt the proliferation of the content.

  NO – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

  NO OPINION

(a)[In particular if you are an end user/consumer or a right
holder):]Have you experienced problems when trying to be
remunerated for the use of the work you have created (on the
basis of pre-existing works)?

(b)[In particular if you are a service provider:]Do you provide
remuneration schemes for users publishing/disseminating the
works they have created (on the basis of pre-existing works)
through your service?

  YES – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

  NO – Please explain

Due to the current landscape regarding copyright, the biggest
issue is actually finding the proper incentive to actually
create. As even distributing without commercial intent can be
difficult and problematic, most people (myself included) don't
even consider monetization as a first-order problem.
Monetization adds another layer of difficulty that, along with
all the other difficulties, doesn't make it worth it and it can
even scare some people off.

  NO OPINION

If there are problems, how would they best be solved?

[Open question]

The Copyright Directive is too outdated in relation to the
current cultural and technological landscape. As a result it
has become too rigid and limitative. The current copyright
directive fails to deal with Fair Use and fails to incentive
people to create, build upon and add to current culture. The EU
needs a more flexible approach, standardized across all
countries, and stating in a non exhaustive way what kind of
actions are allowed, while also allowing room for adaptation
through a 'similar use' policy. Finally, the fair use policy,
if implemented, has to be enforced in a non-restrictive,
non-intrusive way, unlike the current way it is done in the US
regarding DMCA claims.

If your view is that a legislative solution is needed, what
would be its main elements? Which activities should be covered
and under what conditions?

[Open question]

The needed legislative solution must consist of a more flexible
approach that consists of having all the current exceptions
made mandatory and the same across all the EU. These exceptions
must have a similar use clause so that they can also allow
flexibility for future technological improvements and changes
on culture. Secondly, a fair use policy that allows remixing,
critic and parody to be created freely. This measure must also
be applied in a non-restrictive way unlike the DMCA applies to
copyright currently in the US where burden of proof is
completely reversed. Finally, remixing and creating mash-ups
should be considered an exception to copyright. This would
greatly allow (and incentive) the improvement and creation of
derivative works. For non-profit contexts this should be the
limits of the law. Regarding for-profit models an agreement
(licence or small standard fee) could be agreed upon if needed
be, as an alternative to no restriction at all.

If your view is that a different solution is needed, what would
it be?

[Open question]

I don't think there is any good alternative to legislative
changes. The solution should revolve around the points written
in answer 62.

Private copying and reprography

Directive 2001/29/EC enables Member States to implement in their
national legislation exceptions or limitations to the
reproduction right for copies made for private use and
photocopying. Levies are charges imposed at national level on
goods typically used for such purposes (blank media, recording
equipment, photocopying machines, mobile listening devices such
as mp3/mp4 players, computers, etc.) with a view to compensating
rightholders for the harm they suffer when copies are made
without their authorisation by certain categories of persons
(i.e. natural persons making copies for their private use) or
through use of certain technique (i.e. reprography). In that
context, levies are important for rightholders.

With the constant developments in digital technology, the
question arises as to whether the copying of files by
consumers/end-users who have purchased content online - e.g.
when a person has bought an MP3 file and goes on to store
multiple copies of that file (in her computer, her tablet and
her mobile phone) - also triggers, or should trigger, the
application of private copying levies. It is argued that, in
some cases, these levies may indeed be claimed by rightholders
whether or not the licence fee paid by the service provider
already covers copies made by the end user. This approach could
potentially lead to instances of double payments whereby levies
could be claimed on top of service providers’ licence fees.

There is also an on-going discussion as to the application or
not of levies to certain types of cloud-based services such as
personal lockers or personal video recorders.

In your view, is there a need to clarify at the EU level the
scope and application of the private copying and reprography
exceptions in the digital environment?

  YES – Please explain

The difference between digital and analog content is worrying.
The fact that the exact same content has a different set of
rules and allowed uses because of its nature and even the
country it resides makes it very confusing and even counter
intuitive. The fact is analog content can be used more freely
than its digital counterpart. Copying a file for private uses,
format shifting, or moving from one machine to another are a
few examples of limitations that don't happen on the analog
world. Just like a book can be copied for private use, it
stands to reason that an e-book should also be allowed to be
copied for private use. As the digital age progresses, the use
of digital content should be encouraged and made easier, not
further limited in order to keep the older format 'alive'.

  NO – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

  NO OPINION

Should digital copies made by end users for private purposes in
the context of a service that has been licensed by
rightholders, and where the harm to the rightholder is minimal,
be subject to private copying levies?

  YES – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

  NO – Please explain

Rightholders should only be paid for goods and services that
they actually sell, in accordance to basic economic principles.
Charging a levy for the usage (in this case copying) of content
that was already purchased would be already part of my property
goes against this principle and would be paying 'twice' for the
same good. The instant I purchase the mp3 it should be
considered personal property (as a purchase requires to) and I
should be allowed to use it freely like any other kind of
analog private property, including making private copies of it.
The fact that the creation of a private copy does not incur in
any damages to the rightholder further reinforces the fact that
such a levy is not needed. When paying for a service instead of
a digital good, that consists of a licence to access a specific
content, the licence usually enforces a restricted number of
downloads or copies. A levy for such a type of service would
defeat the purpose of these types of service as it would
effectively double the price. These type of services are also
very limitative and a growing number of customers are switching
to services where a purchase actually amounts to a copy and
unlimited access (and re-downloads in case of deletion).

  NO OPINION

How would changes in levies with respect to the application
toonline services (e.g. services based on cloud
computingallowing, for instance, users to have copies on
different devices) impact the development and functioning of
new business models on the one hand and rightholders’ revenue
on the other?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Would you see an added value in making levies visible on the
invoices for products subject to levies?

  YES – Please explain

Definitely. Even though levies are not necessarily the best
approach to the current copyright problem, added transparency
in the form of the levy money's purpose, usage and how much of
the product's price consists of a levy are indeed useful and
valuable measures.

  NO – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

  NO OPINION

Diverging national systems levy different products and apply
different tariffs. This results in obstacles to the free
circulation of goods and services in the Single Market. At the
same time, many Member States continue to allow the
indiscriminate application of private copying levies to all
transactions irrespective of the person to whom the product
subject to a levy is sold (e.g. private person or business). In
that context, not all Member States have ex ante exemption
and/or ex post reimbursement schemes which could remedy these
situations and reduce the number of undue payments.

Have you experienced a situation where a cross-border
transaction resulted in undue levy payments, or duplicate
payments of the same levy, or other obstacles to the free
movement of goods or services?

  YES – Please specify the type of transaction and indicate the
percentage of the undue payments. Please also indicate how a
priori exemption and/or ex post reimbursement schemes could
help to remedy the situation.

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

  NO – Please explain

I am not aware of any situation where such a thing has happened.

  NO OPINION

What percentage of products subject to a levy is sold to persons
other than natural persons for purposes clearly unrelated to
private copying? Do any of those transactions result in undue
payments? Please explain in detail the example you provide
(type of products, type of transaction, stakeholders, etc.).

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Where such undue payments arise, what percentage of trade do
they affect? To what extent could a priori exemptions and/or ex
post reimbursement schemes existing in some Member States help
to remedy the situation?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

If you have identified specific problems with the current
functioning of the levy system, how would these problems best
be solved?

[Open question]

The levy system is based on the assumption that every citizen is
a potential criminal. Aside from the fact that this is not
acceptable nor is a valid justification for the implementation
of such a system, it punishes the vast majority of the paying
customers. Essentially, every single customer that is buying
content legally and buys a blank DVD or a memory card or any
product that requires a levy, is essentially assumed to be a
copyright infringer and asked to support right holders a second
time despite having done so already with the legal purchase. On
the other hand, people doing copyright infringement are
"benefited" by this by only having to pay once, meaning that
the levy could, in a way, be an economical incentive to piracy.
Secondly, in many countries, mine included, I am forced to pay a
levy on hard disks and DVD's while also being legally allowed to
make my own private copies and backups. That is essentially
making me pay for the harm of harmless and legal copying. This
gets even worse if instead of using the storage device for
private copies, I'm using it for backups of actual content that
I'm the author of (computer code, photos etc). I'm being forced
to pay for non-existent harm to my own content. Finally, the
number of devices subject to levy is excessive. My cellphone
and it's memory card certainly aren't going to cause any harm
to rights holders for storing photos and text messages or using
calls.

Fair remuneration of authors and performers

The EU copyright acquis recognises for authors and performers a
number of exclusive rights and, in the case of performers whose
performances are fixed in phonograms, remuneration rights. There
are few provisions in the EU copyright law governing
thetransferof rights from authors or performers to producers or
determining who the owner of the rights is when the work or
other subject matter is created in the context of an employment
contract. This is an area that has been traditionally left for
Member States to regulate and there are significant differences
in regulatory approaches. Substantial differences also exist
between different sectors of the creative industries.

Concerns continue to be raised that authors and performers are
not adequately remunerated, in particular but not solely, as
regards online exploitation. Many consider that the economic
benefit of new forms of exploitation is not being fairly shared
along the whole value chain.Another commonly raised issue
concerns contractual practices, negotiation mechanisms,
presumptions of transfer of rights, buy-out clauses and the
lack of possibility to terminate contracts. Some stakeholders
are of the opinion that rules at national level do not suffice
to improve their situation and that action at EU level is
necessary.

[In particular if you are an author/performer:] What is the best
mechanism (or combination of mechanisms) to ensure that you
receive an adequate remuneration for the exploitation of your
works and performances?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Is there a need to act at the EU level (for instance to prohibit
certain clauses in contracts)?

  YES – Please explain

Many online marketplaces do take lower cuts than traditional
means nowadays. However, there should be a measure enacted by
the eu that forbids the middleman of artists and authors to
take the biggest cut of the profits while restricting the
author to royalties. Also, transfering rights to an
organization (instead of a person) should come with a
restriction in the duration of the copyright protection, to a
way lower value given the fact that such transfers are no
longer a matter of incentive (which is copyright's purpose) but
a matter of interest and profit.

  NO – Please explain why

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

  NO OPINION

If you consider that the current rules are not effective, what
would you suggest to address the shortcomings you identify?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Respect for rights

Directive 2004/48/EE provides for a harmonised framework for the
civil enforcement of intellectual property rights, including
copyright and related rights. The Commission has consulted
broadly on this text. Concerns have been raised as to whether
some of its provisions are still fit to ensure a proper respect
for copyright in the digital age. On the one hand, the current
measures seem to be insufficient to deal with the new
challenges brought by the dissemination of digital content on
the internet; on the other hand, there are concerns about the
current balance between enforcement of copyright and the
protection of fundamental rights, in particular the right for a
private life and data protection. While it cannot be
contestedthat enforcement measures should always be available
in case of infringement of copyright, measures could be
proposed to strengthen respect for copyright when the infringed
content is used for a commercial purpose. One means to do this
could be to clarify the role of intermediaries in the IP
infrastructure. At the same time, there could be clarification
of the safeguards for respect of private life and data
protection for private users.

Should the civil enforcement system in the EU be rendered more
efficient for infringements of copyright committed with a
commercial purpose?

  YES – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

  NO – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

  NO OPINION

In particular, is the current legal frameworkclear enough to
allow forsufficient involvement of intermediaries (such as
Internet service providers, advertising brokers, payment
service providers, domain name registrars, etc.) in inhibiting
online copyright infringements with a commercial purpose? If
not, what measures would be useful to foster the cooperation of
intermediaries?

[Open question]

Before focusing on measures that foster the cooperation of
intermediaries, the legal framework needs to ensure that the
intermediary's liability is limited to a level that benefits
from carrier protection. Without limitations that prevent
things like third party or indirect copyright infringement for
the simple fact of providing a service, like ISP's do, one
opens the door to a high risk of censorship or several
impairments to freedom of speech and communication. Furthermore
such a chilling effect would severely impact businesses and
their freedoms. The uncertainty that affects VPN and other
anonymization services, ISP's, cloud storage and search engines
is incredibly dangerous and attacking these businesses for
tertiary (and sometimes even more indirect) copyright
infringement, or even blaming services for the usage their
users give to it is not the sollution to the copyright problem.
It only chills innovation, creativity and the proliferation of
internet businesses all in favour of a flawed measure that even
now has a noticeable degree of failure with several millions of
legit content being taken down wrongly and with no liability to
the plaintif, while the creator takes the damages for the wrong
takedown.

Does the current civil enforcement framework ensure that the
right balance is achieved between the right to have one’s
copyright respected and other rights such as the protection of
private life and protection of personal data?

  YES – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

  NO – Please explain

I don't think there is even a balance since the framework works
in favor of rightholders almost 100%. The EU's DMCA equivalent
enforces a reversal of burden of proof, with the user being
told guilty and having to prove his innocence (while his
content is down for the meantime) and must then take the costs
of his downtime by himself (and the loss of views/visits/reads)
since the plaintiff is never liable for such wrong take downs.
This lack of consideration towards the users is problematic.
Copyright's purpose is to encourage innovation and creativity
for the better of society as a whole. The current framework
dives society in a climate of uncertainty and fear of liability
even if they are the authors of the content they're
distributing, because a rightholder can wrongly accuse someone
of copyright infringement at any time, or an automated tool can
wrongly do so based on loose similarities on part of a piece of
content. Unfortunately, this happens quite frequently and this
tips the balance on the rightholder's side and chills
innovation as users stop creating due to the fear of liability
or simply because they don't want to deal with such hassle just
to prove their innocence. Consumers do not know what they can
and cannot do with copyright protected material. The current
legislation is simply out of date and fails to respond to the
challenges of the digital environment.

  NO OPINION

A single EU Copyright Title

The idea of establishing a unified EU Copyright Title has been
present in the copyright debate for quite some time now,
although views as to the merits and the feasibility of such an
objective are divided. A unified EU Copyright Title would
totally harmonise the area of copyright law in the EU and
replace national laws. There would then be a single EU title
instead of a bundle of national rights. Some see this as the
only manner in which a truly Single Market for content
protected by copyright can be ensured, while others believe
that the same objective can better be achieved by establishing
a higher level of harmonisation while allowing for a certain
degree of flexibility and specificity in Member States’ legal
systems.

Should the EU pursue the establishment of a single EU Copyright
Title, as a means of establishing a consistent framework for
rights and exceptions to copyright across the EU, as well as a
single framework for enforcement?

  YES

  NO

  NO OPINION

Should this be the next step in the development of copyright in
the EU? Does the current level of difference among the Member
State legislation mean that this is a longer term project?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Other issues

The above questionnaire aims to provide a comprehensive
consultation on the most important matters relating to the
current EU legal framework for copyright. Should any important
matters have been omitted, we would appreciate if you could
bring them to our attention, so they can be properly addressed
in the future.

Are there any other important matters related to the EU legal
framework for copyright? Please explain and indicate how such
matters should be addressed.

[Open question]

There are three important matters that should be addressed: 1)
Non-profit file-sharing should be allowed and not considered a
copyright infringement. Considering that one is allowed to
share their own offline copies as they are the user's property,
one should also be allowed to share the contents of one's hard
disk (his property), as long as it is done in a non-commercial
context. 2) Digital Rights Management (DRM) exists as a measure
to limit the end-user's use of his property. It shouldn't be
considered illegal to modify one's property in order to
circunvent such limitations. Severe limitations should be
imposed, in fact, to companies who implement DRM measures that
limit usage of copyrighted works. 3) Currently copyright is too
harshly and excessively enforced. The IPR Enforcement Directive
makes it so that content is taken down first and then the user
has to prove that the take down was wrongly done (similar to
the DMCA) which consists of reversal burden of proof.
Furthermore, this flaw gives space to abusive and excessive
removal of (often lawful) content. This needs to be solved and
stopped or sanctioned in case of wrongful take downs.

