
Public Consultation

on the review of the EU copyright rules

Contents

Table of Contents

I.  Introduction  2

A.  Context of the consultation  2

B.  How to submit replies to this questionnaire  3

C.  Confidentiality  3

II.  Rights and the functioning of the Single Market  7

A.  Why is it not possible to access many online content
services from anywhere in Europe?  7

B.  Is there a need for more clarity as regards the scope of
what needs to be authorised (or not) in digital transmissions?
10

1.  The act of “making available”  10

2.  Two rights involved in a single act of exploitation  11

3.  Linking and browsing  12

4.  Download to own digital content  13

C.  Registration of works and other subject matter – is it a
good idea?  14

D.  How to improve the use and interoperability of identifiers
15

E.  Term of protection – is it appropriate?  15

III.  Limitations and exceptions in the Single Market  16

A.  Access to content in libraries and archives  19

1.  Preservation and archiving  19

2.  Off-premises access to library collections  20

3.  E – lending  21

4.  Mass digitisation  22

B.  Teaching  23

C.  Research  25

D.  Disabilities  25

E.  Text and data mining  27

F.  User-generated content  28

IV.  Private copying and reprography  31

V.  Fair remuneration of authors and performers  33

VI.  Respect for rights  34

VII.  A single EU Copyright Title  36

VIII.  Other issues  36

Introduction

Context of the consultation

Over the last two decades, digital technology and the Internet
have reshaped the ways in which content is created,
distributed, and accessed. New opportunities have materialised
for those that create and produce content (e.g. a film, a
novel, a song), for new and existing distribution platforms,
for institutions such as libraries, for activities such as
research and for citizens who now expect to be able to access
content – for information, education or entertainment purposes
– regardless of geographical borders.

This new environment also presents challenges. One of them is
for the market to continue to adapt to new forms of
distribution and use. Another one is for the legislator to
ensure that the system of rights, limitations to rights and
enforcement remains appropriate and is adapted to the new
environment. This consultation focuses on the second of these
challenges: ensuring that the EU copyright regulatory framework
stays fit for purpose in the digital environment to support
creation and innovation, tap the full potential of the Single
Market, foster growth and investment in our economy and promote
cultural diversity.

In its "Communication on Content in the Digital Single Market"1

COM (2012)789 final, 18/12/2012.

the Commission set out two parallel tracks of action: on the one
hand, to complete its on-going effort to review and to modernise
the EU copyright legislative framework2

As announced in the Intellectual Property Strategy ' A single
market for Intellectual Property Rights: COM (2011)287 final,
24/05/2011.

3

"Based on market studies and impact assessment and legal
drafting work" as announced in the Communication (2012)789.

with a view to a decision in 2014 on whether to table
legislative reform proposals, and on the other, to facilitate
practical industry-led solutions through the stakeholder
dialogue "Licences for Europe" on issues on which rapid
progress was deemed necessary and possible.

The "Licences for Europe" process has been finalised now4

See the document “Licences for Europe – tem pledges to bring
more content online”:
http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/copyright/docs/licences-for-europe/131113_ten-pledges_en.pdf
.

. The Commission welcomes the practical solutions stakeholders
have put forward in this context and will monitor their
progress. Pledges have been made by stakeholders in all four
Working Groups (cross border portability of services,
user-generated content, audiovisual and film heritage and text
and data mining). Taken together, the Commission expects these
pledges to be a further step in making the user environment
easier in many different situations. The Commission also takes
note of the fact that two groups – user-generated content and
text and data mining – did not reach consensus among
participating stakeholders on either the problems to be
addressed or on the results. The discussions and results of
"Licences for Europe" will be also taken into account in the
context of the review of the legislative framework.

As part of the review process, the Commission is now launching a
public consultation on issues identified in the Communication on
Content in the Digital Single Market, i.e.: "territoriality in
the Internal Market, harmonisation, limitations and exceptions
to copyright in the digital age; fragmentation of the EU
copyright market; and how to improve the effectiveness and
efficiency of enforcement while underpinning its legitimacy in
the wider context of copyright reform". As highlighted in the
October 2013 European Council Conclusions5

EUCO 169/13, 24/25 October 2013.

"Providing digital services and content across the single market
requires the establishment of a copyright regime for the digital
age. The Commission will therefore complete its on-going review
of the EU copyright framework in spring 2014. It is important
to modernise Europe's copyright regime and facilitate
licensing, while ensuring a high level protection of
intellectual property rights and taking into account cultural
diversity".

This consultation builds on previous consultations and public
hearings, in particular those on the "Green Paper on copyright
in the knowledge economy"6

COM(2008) 466/3,
http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/copyright/copyright-infso/index_en.htm#maincontentSec2.

, the "Green Paper on the online distribution of audiovisual
works"7

COM(2011) 427 final,
http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/consultations/2011/audiovisual_en.htm.

and "Content Online"8

http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/consultations/2009/content_online_en.htm.

. These consultations provided valuable feedback from
stakeholders on a number of questions, on issues as diverse as
the territoriality of copyright and possible ways to overcome
territoriality, exceptions related to the online dissemination
of knowledge, and rightholders’ remuneration, particularly in
the audiovisual sector. Views were expressed by stakeholders
representing all stages in the value chain, including right
holders, distributors, consumers, and academics. The questions
elicited widely diverging views on the best way to proceed. The
"Green Paper on Copyright in the Knowledge Economy" was followed
up by a Communication. The replies to the "Green Paper on the
online distribution of audiovisual works" have fed into
subsequent discussions on the Collective Rights Management
Directive and into the current review process.

How to submit replies to this questionnaire

You are kindly asked to send your replies by 5 February 2014 as
a word or pdf document to the following e-mail address of DG
Internal Market and Services:
markt-copyright-consultation@ec.europa.eu. Please note that
replies sent after that date will not be taken into account.

This consultation is addressed to different categories of
stakeholders. To the extent possible, the questions indicate
the category/ies of respondents most likely to be concerned by
them (annotation in brackets, before the actual question).
Respondents should nevertheless feel free to reply to any/all
of the questions. Also, please note that, apart from the
question concerning the identification of the respondent, none
of the questions is obligatory. Replies containing answers only
to part of the questions will be also accepted.

You are requested to provide your answers directly within this
consultation document. For the “Yes/No/No opinion” questions
please put the selected answer in bold and underline it so it
is easy for us to see your selection.

In your answers to the questions, you are invited to refer to
the situation in EU Member States. You are also invited in
particular to indicate, where relevant, what would be the
impact of options you put forward in terms of costs,
opportunities and revenues.

The public consultation is available in English. Responses may,
however, be sent in any of the 24 official languages of the EU.


Confidentiality

The contributions received in this round of consultation as well
as a summary report presenting the responses in a statistical
and aggregated form will be published on the website of DG
MARKT.

Please note that all contributions received will be published
together with the identity of the contributor, unless the
contributor objects to the publication of their personal data
on the grounds that such publication would harm his or her
legitimate interests. In this case, the contribution will be
published in anonymous form upon the contributor's explicit
request. Otherwise the contribution will not be published nor
will its content be reflected in the summary report.

Please read our Privacy statement.

Please identify yourself:

Name:

Graham Cobb

In the interests of transparency, organisations (including, for
example, NGOs, trade associations and commercial enterprises)
are invited to provide the public with relevant information
about themselves by registering in the Interest Representative
Register and subscribing to its Code of Conduct.

If you are a Registered organisation, please indicate your
Register ID number below. Your contribution will then be
considered as representing the views of your organisation.

…………………………………………………………………………………………………..

…………………………………………………………………………………………………..

If your organisation is not registered, you have the opportunity
to register now. Responses from organisations not registered
will be published separately.

If you would like to submit your reply on an anonymous basis
please indicate it below by underlining the following answer:

Yes, I would like to submit my reply on an anonymous basis

Type of respondent (Please underline the appropriate):

End user/consumer (e.g. internet user, reader, subscriber to
music or audiovisual service, researcher, student) OR
Representative of end users/consumers

 for the purposes of this questionnaire normally referred to
in questions as "end users/consumers"

Institutional user (e.g. school, university, research centre,
library, archive) OR Representative of institutional users

 for the purposes of this questionnaire normally referred to
in questions as "institutional users"

Author/Performer OR Representative of authors/performers

Publisher/Producer/Broadcaster OR Representative of
publishers/producers/broadcasters

 the two above categories are, for the purposes of this
questionnaire, normally referred to in questions as "right
holders"

Intermediary/Distributor/Other service provider (e.g. online
music or audiovisual service, games platform, social media,
search engine, ICT industry) OR Representative of
intermediaries/distributors/other service providers

 for the purposes of this questionnaire normally referred to
in questions as "service providers"

Collective Management Organisation

Public authority

Member State

Other (Please explain):

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Rights and the functioning of the Single Market

Why is it not possible to access many online content services
from anywhere in Europe? [The territorial scope of the rights
involved in digital transmissions and the segmentation of the
market through licensing agreements]

Holders of copyright and related rights – e.g. writers, singers,
musicians - do not enjoy a single protection in the EU. Instead,
they are protected on the basis of a bundle of national rights
in each Member State. Those rights have been largely harmonised
by the existing EU Directives. However, differences remain and
the geographical scope of the rights is limited to the
territory of the Member State granting them. Copyright is thus
territorial in the sense that rights are acquired and enforced
on a country-by-country basis under national law9

This principle has been confirmed by the Court of justice on
several occasions.

.

The dissemination of copyright-protected content on the Internet
– e.g. by a music streaming service, or by an online e-book
seller – therefore requires, in principle, an authorisation for
each national territory in which the content is communicated to
the public. Rightholders are, of course, in a position to grant
a multi-territorial or pan-European licence, such that content
services can be provided in several Member States and across
borders. A number of steps have been taken at EU level to
facilitate multi-territorial licences: the proposal for a
Directive on Collective Rights Management10

Proposal for a Directive of the European Parliament and of the
Council of 11 July 2012 on collective management of copyright
and related rights and multi-territorial licensing of rights in
musical works for online uses in the internal market, COM(2012)
372 final.

should significantly facilitate the delivery of
multi-territorial licences in musical works for online
services11

Collective Management Organisations play a significant role in
the management of online rights for musical works in contrast
to the situation where online rights are licensed directly by
right holders such as film or record producers or by newspaper
or book publishers.

; the structured stakeholder dialogue “Licences for Europe”12

You can find more information on the following website:
http://ec.europa.eu/licences-for-europe-dialogue/.

and market-led developments such as the on-going work in the
Linked Content Coalition13

You can find more information on the following website:
http://www.linkedcontentcoalition.org/.

.

"Licences for Europe" addressed in particular the specific issue
of cross-border portability, i.e. the ability of consumers
having subscribed to online services in their Member State to
keep accessing them when travelling temporarily to other Member
States. As a result, representatives of the audio-visual sector
issued a joint statement affirming their commitment to continue
working towards the further development of cross-border
portability14

See the document “Licences for Europe – tem pledges to bring
more content online”:
http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/copyright/docs/licences-for-europe/131113_ten-pledges_en.pdf
.

.

Despite progress, there are continued problems with the
cross-border provision of, and access to, services. These
problems are most obvious to consumers wanting to access
services that are made available in Member States other than
the one in which they live. Not all online services are
available in all Member States and consumers face problems when
trying to access such services across borders. In some
instances, even if the “same” service is available in all
Member States, consumers cannot access the service across
borders (they can only access their “national” service, and if
they try to access the "same" service in another Member State
they are redirected to the one designated for their country of
residence).

This situation may in part stem from the territoriality of
rights and difficulties associated with the clearing of rights
in different territories. Contractual clauses in licensing
agreements between right holders and distributors and/or
between distributors and end users may also be at the origin of
some of the problems (denial of access, redirection).

The main issue at stake here is, therefore, whether further
measures (legislative or non-legislative, including market-led
solutions) need to be taken at EU level in the medium term15

For possible long term measures such as the establishment of a
European Copyright Code (establishing a single title) see
section VII of this consultation document.

to increase the cross-border availability of content services in
the Single Market, while ensuring an adequate level of
protection for right holders.

[In particular if you are an end user/consumer:] Have you faced
problems when trying to access online services in an EU Member
State other than the one in which you live?

 YES - Please provide examples indicating the Member State,
the sector and the type of content concerned (e.g. premium
content such as certain films and TV series, audio-visual
content in general, music, e-books, magazines, journals and
newspapers, games, applications and other software)

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO

 NO OPINION

[In particular if you are a service provider:] Have you faced
problems when seeking to provide online services across borders
in the EU?

 YES - Please explain whether such problems, in your
experience, are related to copyright or to other issues (e.g.
business decisions relating to the cost of providing services
across borders, compliance with other laws such as consumer
protection)? Please provide examples indicating the Member
State, the sector and the type of content concerned (e.g.
premium content such as certain films and TV series,
audio-visual content in general, music, e-books, magazines,
journals and newspapers, games, applications and other
software).

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO

 NO OPINION

[In particular if you are a right holder or a collective
management organisation:] How often are you asked to grant
multi-territorial licences? Please indicate, if possible, the
number of requests per year and provide examples indicating the
Member State, the sector and the type of content concerned.

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

If you have identified problems in the answers to any of the
questions above – what would be the best way to tackle them?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

[In particular if you are a right holder or a collective
management organisation:] Are there reasons why, even in cases
where you hold all the necessary rights for all the territories
in question, you would still find it necessary or justified to
impose territorial restrictions on a service provider (in
order, for instance, to ensure that access to certain content
is not possible in certain European countries)?

 YES – Please explain by giving examples

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO

 NO OPINION

[In particular if you are e.g. a broadcaster or a service
provider:] Are there reasons why, even in cases where you have
acquired all the necessary rights for all the territories in
question, you would still find it necessary or justified to
impose territorial restrictions on the service recipient (in
order for instance, to redirect the consumer to a different
website than the one he is trying to access)?

 YES – Please explain by giving examples

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO

 NO OPINION

Do you think that further measures (legislative or
non-legislative, including market-led solutions) are needed at
EU level to increase the cross-border availability of content
services in the Single Market, while ensuring an adequate level
of protection for right holders?

 YES – Please explain

Reform is needed to allow new and innovative services to be very
rapidly created and introduced. The focus needs to be less on
protection of rights and much, much more on monetisation. It
needs to be easy to introduce ways for users (consumer and
enterprise) to pay for content (including sponsorship and
advertising approaches). .

 NO – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO OPINION

Is there a need for more clarity as regards the scope of what
needs to be authorised (or not) in digital transmissions?[The
definition of the rights involved in digital transmissions]

The EU framework for the protection of copyright and related
rights in the digital environment is largely established by
Directive 2001/29/EC16

Directive 2001/29/EC of the European Parliament and of the
Council of 22 May 2001 on the harmonisation of certain aspects
of copyright and related rights in the information society.

on the harmonisation of certain aspects of copyright and related
rights in the information society. Other EU directives in this
field that are relevant in the online environment are those
relating to the protection of software17

Directive 2009/24/EC of the European Parliament and of the
Council of 23 April 2009 on the legal protection of computer
programs.

and databases18

Directive 96/9/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council
of 11 March 1996 on the legal protection of databases.

.

Directive 2001/29/EC harmonises the rights of authors and
neighbouring rightholders19

Film and record producers, performers and broadcasters are
holders of so-called “neighbouring rights” in, respectively,
their films, records, performances and broadcast. Authors’
content protected by copyright is referred to as a “work” or
“works”, while content protected by neighbouring rights is
referred to as “other subject matter”.

which are essential for the transmission of digital copies of
works (e.g. an e-book) and other protected subject matter (e.g.
a record in a MP3 format) over the internet or similar digital
networks.

The most relevant rights for digital transmissions are the
reproduction right, i.e. the right to authorise or prohibit the
making of copies20

The right to “authorise or prohibit direct or indirect,
temporary or permanent reproduction by any means and in any
form, in whole or in part” (see Art. 2 of Directive 2001/29/EC)
although temporary acts of reproduction of a transient or
incidental nature are, under certain conditions, excluded (see
art. 5(1) of Directive 2001/29/EC).

, (notably relevant at the start of the transmission – e.g. the
uploading of a digital copy of a work to a server in view of
making it available – and at the users’ end – e.g. when a user
downloads a digital copy of a work) and the communication to
the public/making available right, i.e. the rights to authorise
or prohibit the dissemination of the works in digital networks21

The right to authorise or prohibit any communication to the
public by wire or wireless means and to authorise or prohibit
the making available to the public “on demand” (see Art. 3 of
Directive 2001/29/EC).

. These rights are intrinsically linked in digital transmissions
and both need to be cleared.

The act of “making available”

Directive 2001/29/EC specifies neither what is covered by the
making available right (e.g. the upload, the accessibility by
the public, the actual reception by the public) nor where the
act of “making available” takes place. This does not raise
questions if the act is limited to a single territory.
Questions arise however when the transmission covers several
territories and rights need to be cleared (does the act of
"making available" happen in the country of the upload only? in
each of the countries where the content is potentially
accessible? in each of the countries where the content is
effectively accessed?). The most recent case law of the Court
of Justice of the European Union (CJEU) suggests that a
relevant criterion is the “targeting” of a certain Member
State's public22

See in particular Case C-173/11 (Football Dataco vs Sportradar)
and Case C-5/11 (Donner) for copyright and related rights, and
Case C-324/09 (L’Oréal vs eBay) for trademarks. With regard to
jurisdiction see also joined Cases C-585/08 and C-144/09
(Pammer and Hotel Alpenhof) and pending CaseC-441/13 (Pez
Hejduk); see however, adopting a different approach, Case
C-170/12 (Pinckney vs KDG Mediatech).

. According to this approach the copyright-relevant act (which
has to be licensed) occurs at least in those countries which
are “targeted” by the online service provider. A service
provider “targets” a group of customers residing in a specific
country when it directs its activity to that group, e.g. via
advertisement, promotions, a language or a currency
specifically targeted at that group.

Is the scope of the “making available” right in cross-border
situations – i.e. when content is disseminated across borders –
sufficiently clear?

 YES

 NO – Please explain how this could be clarified and what
type of clarification would be required (e.g. as in "targeting"
approach explained above, as in "country of origin" approach23

The objective of implementing a “country of origin” approach is
to localise the copyright relevant act that must be licenced in
a single Member State (the "country of origin", which could be
for example the Member State in which the content is uploaded
or where the service provider is established), regardless of in
how many Member States the work can be accessed or received.
Such an approach has already been introduced at EU level with
regard to broadcasting by satellite (see Directive 93/83/EEC on
the coordination of certain rules concerning copyright and
rights related to copyright applicable to satellite
broadcasting and cable retransmission).

)

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO OPINION

[In particular if you are a right holder:] Could a clarification
of the territorial scope of the “making available” right have an
effect on the recognition of your rights (e.g. whether you are
considered to be an author or not, whether you are considered
to have transferred your rights or not), on your remuneration,
or on the enforcement of rights (including the availability of
injunctive relief24

Injunctive relief is a temporary or permanent remedy allowing
the right holder to stop or prevent an infringement of his/her
right.

)?

 YES – Please explain how such potential effects could be
addressed

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO

 NO OPINION

Two rights involved in a single act of exploitation

Each act of transmission in digital networks entails (in the
current state of technology and law) several reproductions.
This means that there are two rights that apply to digital
transmissions: the reproduction right and the making available
right. This may complicate the licensing of works for online
use notably when the two rights are held by different
persons/entities.

[In particular if you a service provider or a right holder:]
Does the application of two rights to a single act of economic
exploitation in the online environment (e.g. a download) create
problems for you?

 YES – Please explain what type of measures would be needed
in order to address such problems (e.g. facilitation of joint
licences when the rights are in different hands, legislation to
achieve the "bundling of rights")

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO

 NO OPINION

Linking and browsing

Hyperlinks are references to data that lead a user from one
location in the Internet to another. They are indispensable for
the functioning of the Internet as a network. Several cases are
pending before the CJEU25

Cases C-466/12 (Svensson), C-348/13 (Bestwater International)
and C-279/13 (C More entertainment).

in which the question has been raised whether the provision of
a clickable link constitutes an act of communication to the
public/making available to the public subject to the
authorisation of the rightholder.

A user browsing the internet (e.g. viewing a web-page) regularly
creates temporary copies of works and other subject-matter
protected under copyright on the screen and in the 'cache'
memory of his computer. A question has been referred to the
CJEU26

Case C-360/13 (Public Relations Consultants Association Ltd).
See also
http://www.supremecourt.gov.uk/decided-cases/docs/UKSC_2011_0202_PressSummary.pdf.

as to whether such copies are always covered by the mandatory
exception for temporary acts of reproduction provided for in
Article 5(1) of Directive 2001/29/EC.

Should the provision of a hyperlink leading to a work or other
subject matter protected under copyright, either in general or
under specific circumstances, be subject to the authorisation
of the rightholder?

 YES – Please explain whether you consider this to be the
case in general, or under specific circumstances, and why

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO – Please explain whether you consider this to be the case
in general, or under specific circumstances, and why (e.g.
because it does not amount to an act of communication to the
public – or to a new public, or because it should be covered by
a copyright exception)

Absolutely not. A link is just an address entry saying where to
go for something. It is part of the Internet infrastructure,
that makes the Internet work, and is not content, not
copyrightable, in its own right. And every link leads to a work
protected under copyright, of course.

Even using the link in a commercial context (such as creating a
useful list of links, and selling it) is just a directory
operation. The list itself may be copyrightable but no
permission is required from the addressees to include them in
the directory. It is up to the destination of the link whether
it chooses to respond to attempts to use the link. It is that
website and that website only (not the publisher of the link)
which is communicating the work to the public, and only if it
chooses to. There is no reason why a website should blindly
honour a request to access a link -- if the rightsholder wishes
to restrict access to the content they can, and must, do so on
the website.

Also, as a link URL is just a pointer -- a technical part of the
Internet infrastructure -- it is not itself copyrightable (any
more than a street address is copyrightable). Note that this is
the case even if the rightsholder decides to include an extract
from the work in the URL (such as
http://www.example.com/It_is_a_truth_universally_acknowledged_that_a_single_man_in_possession_of_a_good_fortune_must_be_in_want_of_a_wife).
It is the case that, if the publisher of the link decides to
include an extract from the work (for example the text of the
first paragraph of an online news report) that may be
copyrightable. But, short extracts should be permitted.

In summary, no publisher of a link makes a work available or
communicates it to the public -- only the destination website
does that if it chooses to accept the request to access the
work. Any permissions, restrictions or business rules must (and
can only) be applied at the serving website. Anything else
breaks the whole Internet. .

 NO OPINION

Should the viewing of a web-page where this implies the
temporary reproduction of a work or other subject matter
protected under copyright on the screen and in the cache memory
of the user’s computer, either in general or under specific
circumstances, be subject to the authorisation of the
rightholder?

 YES – Please explain whether you consider this to be the
case in general, or under specific circumstances, and why

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO – Please explain whether you consider this to be the case
in general, or under specific circumstances, and why (e.g.
because it is or should be covered by a copyright exception)

No. This is a bug in (some) current laws. Viewing a web page is
not copying the work. Although the internal technical operation
of the Internet and the computer requires making several
transient copies, they are mere techicalities of the viewing
process, not copies which should be restricted by copyright
law. The original intent of copyright legislation is clearly
not infringed by viewing the work any more than it would be
infringed by viewing it in a mirror (or a periscope).

Additionally to this technical argument, it is also clear that
no user should find themselves breaching copyright just by
surfing the Internet. If a website chooses to make works
available then it is explicitly choosing to publish them for
viewing (by that user, at that time). Any authorisation must be
determined by the publishing website before making the work
available to the user. No further permission can be required
from the rightsholder if their website chooses to make it
available.

I also note that no breach of copyright occurs if I look through
your window and read a document you leave lying on your desk
(even if I rig up several mirrors to be able to do it).
Copyright would only come into play if I copied the document.
Viewing works on the Internet is the same thing.

The key principle is that copyright must involve making a copy
AND making that copy available to others or at another place or
time. Just duplicating the bits should not be the definition of
a copy for electronic works. .

 NO OPINION

Download to own digital content

Digital content is increasingly being bought via digital
transmission (e.g. download to own). Questions arise as to the
possibility for users to dispose of the files they buy in this
manner (e.g. by selling them or by giving them as a gift). The
principle of EU exhaustion of the distribution right applies in
the case of the distribution of physical copies (e.g. when a
tangible article such as a CD or a book, etc. is sold, the
right holder cannot prevent the further distribution of that
tangible article)27

See also recital 28 of Directive 2001/29/EC.

. The issue that arises here is whether this principle can also
be applied in the case of an act of transmission equivalent in
its effect to distribution (i.e. where the buyer acquires the
property of the copy)28

In Case C-128/11 (Oracle vs. UsedSoft) the CJEU ruled that an
author cannot oppose the resale of a second-hand licence that
allows downloading his computer program from his website and
using it for an unlimited period of time. The exclusive right
of distribution of a copy of a computer program covered by such
a licence is exhausted on its first sale. While it is thus
admitted that the distribution right may be subject to
exhaustion in case of computer programs offered for download
with the right holder’s consent, the Court was careful to
emphasise that it reached this decision based on the Computer
Programs Directive. It was stressed that this exhaustion rule
constituted a lex specialis in relation to the Information
Society Directive (UsedSoft, par. 51, 56).

. This raises difficult questions, notably relating to the
practical application of such an approach (how to avoid
re-sellers keeping and using a copy of a work after they have
“re-sold” it – this is often referred to as the “forward and
delete” question) as well as to the economic implications of
the creation of a second-hand market of copies of perfect
quality that never deteriorate (in contrast to the second-hand
market for physical goods).

[In particular if you are an end user/consumer:] Have you faced
restrictions when trying to resell digital files that you have
purchased (e.g. mp3 file, e-book)?

 YES – Please explain by giving examples

Yes. I have purchased digital books and found that they are tied
to a particular email address so cannot be sold or passed on to
others after I have finished with them. This restriction does
not apply to physical books -- and rightly so. Publishers have
no right to try to restrict the further use of any work I have
purchased, except to prevent me both making a copy and keeping
the original. On this basis, I no longer purchase any
DRM-encumbered digital goods, only DRM-free material where I
can exercise my rights to resale, loan, etc. .

 NO

 NO OPINION

[In particular if you are a right holder or a service provider:]
What would be the consequences of providing a legal framework
enabling the resale of previously purchased digital content?
Please specify per market (type of content) concerned.

[Open question]

Resale of digital content must be allowed and even encouraged.
This is required in order to provide users with fair rights. In
particular, this is important to keep consumer prices reasonable
and avoid rent-seeking. .

Registration of works and other subject matter – is it a good
idea?

Registration is not often discussed in copyright in the EU as
the existing international treaties in the area prohibit
formalities as a condition for the protection and exercise of
rights. However, this prohibition is not absolute29

For example, it does not affect “domestic” works – i.e. works
originating in the country imposing the formalities as opposed
to works originating in another country.

. Moreover a system of registration does not need to be made
compulsory or constitute a precondition for the protection and
exercise of rights. With a longer term of protection and with
the increased opportunities that digital technology provides
for the use of content (including older works and works that
otherwise would not have been disseminated), the advantages and
disadvantages of a system of registration are increasingly being
considered30

On the basis of Article 3.6 of the Directive 2012/28/EU of the
European Parliament and of the Council of 25 October 2012 on
certain permitted uses of orphan works, a publicly accessible
online database is currently being set up by the Office for
Harmonisation of the Internal Market (OHIM) for the
registration of orphan works.

.

Would the creation of a registration system at EU level help in
the identification and licensing of works and other subject
matter?

 YES

 NO

 NO OPINION

What would be the possible advantages of such a system?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

What would be the possible disadvantages of such a system?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

What incentives for registration by rightholders could be
envisaged?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

How to improve the use and interoperability of identifiers

There are many private databases of works and other subject
matter held by producers, collective management organisations,
and institutions such as libraries, which are based to
a greater or lesser extent on the use of (more or less)
interoperable, internationally agreed ‘identifiers’.
Identifiers can be compared to a reference number embedded in a
work, are specific to the sector in which they have been
developed31

E.g. the International Standard Recording Code (ISRC) is used to
identify recordings, the International Standard Book Number
(ISBN) is used to identify books.

, and identify, variously, the work itself, the owner or the
contributor to a work or other subject matter. There are
notable examples of where industry is undertaking actions to
improve the interoperability of such identifiers and databases.
The Global Repertoire Database32

You will find more information about this initiative on the
following website: http://www.globalrepertoiredatabase.com/.

should, once operational, provide a single source of information
on the ownership and control of musical works worldwide. The
Linked Content Coalition33

You will find more information about this initiative (funded in
part by the European Commission) on the following website:
www.linkedcontentcoalition.org.

was established to develop building blocks for the expression
and management of rights and licensing across all content and
media types. It includes the development of a Rights Reference
Model (RRM) – a comprehensive data model for all types of
rights in all types of content. The UK Copyright Hub34

You will find more information about this initiative on the
following website: http://www.copyrighthub.co.uk/.

is seeking to take such identification systems a step further,
and to create a linked platform, enabling automated licensing
across different sectors.

What should be the role of the EU in promoting the adoption
of identifiers in the content sector, and in promoting the
development and interoperability of rights ownership and
permissions databases?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Term of protection – is it appropriate?

Works and other subject matter are protected under copyright for
a limited period of time. After the term of protection has
expired, a work falls into the public domain and can be freely
used by anyone (in accordance with the applicable national
rules on moral rights). The Berne Convention35

Berne Convention for the Protection of Literary and Artistic
Works, http://www.wipo.int/treaties/en/ip/berne/.

requires a minimum term of protection of 50 years after the
death of the author. The EU rules extend this term of
protection to 70 years after the death of the author (as do
many other countries, e.g. the US).

With regard to performers in the music sector and phonogram
producers, the term provided for in the EU rules also extend 20
years beyond what is mandated in international agreements,
providing for a term of protection of 70 years after the first
publication. Performers and producers in the audio-visual
sector, however, do not benefit from such an extended term of
protection.

Are the current terms of copyright protection still appropriate
in the digital environment?

 YES – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO – Please explain if they should be longer or shorter

They are completely in appropriate. 15 years is more reasonable.
After that time others should be able to freely use the work as
a basis of their own works. .

 NO OPINION

Limitations and exceptions in the Single Market

Limitations and exceptions to copyright and related rights
enable the use of works and other protected subject-matter,
without obtaining authorisation from the rightholders, for
certain purposes and to a certain extent (for instance the use
for illustration purposes of an extract from a novel by a
teacher in a literature class). At EU level they are
established in a number of copyright directives, most notably
Directive 2001/29/EC36

Plus Directive 96/9/EC on the legal protection of databases;
Directive 2009/24/EC on the legal protection of computer
programs, and Directive 92/100/EC on rental right and lending
right.

.

Exceptions and limitations in the national and EU copyright laws
have to respect international law37

Article 9(2) of the Berne Convention for the Protection of
Literary and Artistic Works (1971); Article 13 of the TRIPS
Agreement (Trade Related Intellectual Property Rights) 1994;
Article 16(2) of the WIPO Performers and Phonograms Treaty
(1996); Article 9(2) of the WIPO Copyright Treaty (1996).

. In accordance with international obligations, the EU acquis
requires that limitations and exceptions can only be applied in
certain special cases which do not conflict with a normal
exploitation of the work or other subject matter and do not
unreasonably prejudice the legitimate interest of the
rightholders.

Whereas the catalogue of limitations and exceptions included in
EU law is exhaustive (no other exceptions can be applied to the
rights harmonised at EU level)38

Other than the grandfathering of the exceptions of minor
importance for analogue uses existing in Member States at the
time of adoption of Directive 2001/29/EC (see, Art. 5(3)(o)).

, these limitations and exceptions are often optional39

With the exception of certain limitations: (i) in the Computer
Programs Directive, (ii) in the Database Directive, (iii)
Article 5(1) in the Directive 2001/29/EC and (iv) the Orphan
Works Directive.

, in the sense that Member States are free to reflect in
national legislation as many or as few of them as they wish.
Moreover, the formulation of certain of the limitations and
exceptions is general enough to give significant flexibility to
the Member States as to how, and to what extent, to implement
them (if they decide to do so). Finally, it is worth noting
that not all of the limitations and exceptions included in the
EU legal framework for copyright are of equivalent significance
in policy terms and in terms of their potential effect on the
functioning of the Single Market.

In addition, in the same manner that the definition of the
rights is territorial (i.e. has an effect only within the
territory of the Member State), the definition of the
limitations and exceptions to the rights is territorial too (so
an act that is covered by an exception in a Member State "A" may
still require the authorisation of the rightholder once we move
to the Member State "B")40

Only the exception established in the recent Orphan Works
Directive (a mandatory exception to copyright and related
rights in the case where the rightholders are not known or
cannot be located) has been given a cross-border effect, which
means that, for instance, once a literary work – for instance a
novel – is considered an orphan work in a Member State, that
same novel shall be considered an orphan work in all Member
States and can be used and accessed in all Member States.

.

The cross-border effect of limitations and exceptions also
raises the question of fair compensation of rightholders. In
some instances, Member States are obliged to compensate
rightholders for the harm inflicted on them by a limitation or
exception to their rights. In other instances Member States are
not obliged, but may decide, to provide for such compensation.
If a limitation or exception triggering a mechanism of fair
compensation were to be given cross-border effect (e.g. the
books are used for illustration in an online course given by an
university in a Member State "A" and the students are in a
Member State "B") then there would also be a need to clarify
which national law should determine the level of that
compensation and who should pay it.

Finally, the question of flexibility and adaptability is being
raised: what is the best mechanism to ensure that the EU and
Member States’ regulatory frameworks adapt when necessary
(either to clarify that certain uses are covered by an
exception or to confirm that for certain uses the authorisation
of rightholders is required)? The main question here is whether
a greater degree of flexibility can be introduced in the EU and
Member States regulatory framework while ensuring the required
legal certainty, including for the functioning of the Single
Market, and respecting the EU's international obligations.

Are there problems arising from the fact that most limitations
and exceptions provided in the EU copyright directives are
optional for the Member States?

 YES – Please explain by referring to specific cases

Copyright rules need to be harmonised across the EU. However, it
is not the "limitations and exceptions" which need to be
harmonised: copyright itself must be narrowly defined and
restricted and that is what should be harmonised. In
particular, "fair use" (including private, non-commercial use)
should normally be permitted with only limited actions being
prevented by copyright. .

 NO – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO OPINION

Should some/all of the exceptions be made mandatory and, if so,
is there a need for a higher level of harmonisation of such
exceptions?

 YES – Please explain by referring to specific cases

As descibed in my previous answer, copyright rules should be
based around an assessment of "fair use" with only "unfair"
acts proscribed, and that principle should be mandatory.
Examples of "fair use" and other permitted uses should apply
thoughout the EU as it is unreasonable that actions may be
legal in some states and not in others. .

 NO – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO OPINION

Should any new limitations and exceptions be added to or removed
from the existing catalogue? Please explain by referring to
specific cases.

[Open question]

Certainly no exceptions can be removed. As discussed above, the
EU should introduce a principle of "fair use", as is used in
other countries (such as the US). Any action which is deemed to
be "fair" should be permitted. This general principle would go a
long way to making the rules immediately adaptable to
technological changes. As examples, parody, satire and
reasonable quotation must be regarded as "fair use". This would
include, for example, providing a satirical voice-over for a
video. .

Independently from the questions above, is there a need to
provide for a greater degree of flexibility in the EU
regulatory framework for limitations and exceptions?

 YES – Please explain why

As described above, a "fair use" approach should be adopted
specifically to allow for rapid (non-legislative) adaptations.
.

 NO – Please explain why

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO OPINION

If yes, what would be the best approach to provide for
flexibility? (e.g. interpretation by national courts and the
ECJ, periodic revisions of the directives, interpretations by
the Commission, built-in flexibility, e.g. in the form of a
fair-use or fair dealing provision / open norm, etc.)? Please
explain indicating what would be the relative advantages and
disadvantages of such an approach as well as its possible
effects on the functioning of the Internal Market.

[Open question]

A "fair use" approach is likely to be best. This mechanism
clearly works (it is applied in the US, for example).

One disadavantage of "fair use" is that the definitions depend
on court decisions. Some usages are clearly "fair" and should
be enshrined in statute (and mandatory across the EU) in order
to provide a basis and certainty in the early days. There is no
need to have a similar list of restrictions because these are
mostly clearly "unfair" and also are exactly the things that
most need to be able change as technology changes.

One advantage of "fair use" is that it rapidly creates certainty
for new developments and technologies. Some may think that
waiting for a court to decide what is "fair" for a new
technology would delay things but, in fact, that happens much,
much faster than waiting for legislation! A "fair use" approach
means most decisions are obvious to all involved (such as the
fact that reading a work on a computer screen is not a form of
copying) and those that are not obvious are decided much faster
than waiting for legislation.

This increased certainty will allow the EU to much more rapidly
develop and use new technologies and new business models,
improving the lives of citizens and improving the
competitiveness of EU enterprises. ,

Does the territoriality of limitations and exceptions, in your
experience, constitute a problem?

 YES – Please explain why and specify which exceptions you
are referring to

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO – Please explain why and specify which exceptions you are
referring to

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO OPINION

In the event that limitations and exceptions established at
national level were to have cross-border effect, how should the
question of “fair compensation” be addressed, when such
compensation is part of the exception? (e.g. who pays whom,
where?)

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Access to content in libraries and archives

Directive 2001/29/EC enables Member States to reflect in their
national law a range of limitations and exceptions for the
benefit of publicly accessible libraries, educational
establishments and museums, as well as archives. If
implemented, these exceptions allow acts of preservation and
archiving41

Article 5(2)c of Directive 2001/29.

and enable on-site consultation of the works and other subject
matter in the collections of such institutions42

Article 5(3)n of Directive 2001/29.

. The public lending (under an exception or limitation) by these
establishments of physical copies of works and other subject
matter is governed by the Rental and Lending Directive43

Article 5 of Directive 2006/115/EC.

.

Questions arise as to whether the current framework continues to
achieve the objectives envisaged or whether it needs to be
clarified or updated to cover use in digital networks. At the
same time, questions arise as to the effect of such a possible
expansion on the normal exploitation of works and other subject
matter and as to the prejudice this may cause to rightholders.
The role of licensing and possible framework agreements between
different stakeholders also needs to be considered here.

Preservation and archiving

The preservation of the copies of works or other subject-matter
held in the collections of cultural establishments (e.g. books,
records, or films) – the restoration or replacement of works,
the copying of fragile works - may involve the creation of
another copy/ies of these works or other subject matter. Most
Member States provide for an exception in their national laws
allowing for the making of such preservation copies. The scope
of the exception differs from Member State to Member State (as
regards the type of beneficiary establishments, the types of
works/subject-matter covered by the exception, the mode of
copying and the number of reproductions that a beneficiary
establishment may make). Also, the current legal status of new
types of preservation activities (e.g. harvesting and archiving
publicly available web content) is often uncertain.

(a) [In particular if you are an institutional user:] Have you
experienced specific problems when trying to use an exception
to preserve and archive specific works or other subject matter
in your collection?

(b) [In particular if you are a right holder:] Have you
experienced problems with the use by libraries, educational
establishments, museum or archives of the preservation
exception?

 YES – Please explain, by Member State, sector, and the type
of use in question.

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO

 NO OPINION

If there are problems, how would they best be solved?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

If your view is that a legislative solution is needed, what
would be its main elements? Which activities of the beneficiary
institutions should be covered and under which conditions?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

If your view is that a different solution is needed, what would
it be?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Off-premises access to library collections

Directive 2001/29/EC provides an exception for the consultation
of works and other subject-matter (consulting an e-book,
watching a documentary) via dedicated terminals on the premises
of such establishments for the purpose of research and private
study. The online consultation of works and other
subject-matter remotely (i.e. when the library user is not on
the premises of the library) requires authorisation and is
generally addressed in agreements between
universities/libraries and publishers. Some argue that the law
rather than agreements should provide for the possibility to,
and the conditions for, granting online access to collections.

(a) [In particular if you are an institutional user:] Have you
experienced specific problems when trying to negotiate
agreements with rights holders that enable you to provide
remote access, including across borders, to your collections
(or parts thereof) for purposes of research and private study?

(b) [In particular if you are an end user/consumer:] Have you
experienced specific problems when trying to consult, including
across borders, works and other subject-matter held in the
collections of institutions such as universities and national
libraries when you are not on the premises of the institutions
in question?

(c) [In particular if you are a right holder:] Have you
negotiated agreements with institutional users that enable
those institutions to provide remote access, including across
borders, to the works or other subject-matter in their
collections, for purposes of research and private study?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

If there are problems, how would they best be solved?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

If your view is that a legislative solution is needed, what
would be its main elements? Which activities of the beneficiary
institutions should be covered and under which conditions?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

If your view is that a different solution is needed, what would
it be?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

E – lending

Traditionally, public libraries have loaned physical copies of
works (i.e. books, sometimes also CDs and DVDs) to their users.
Recent technological developments have made it technically
possible for libraries to provide users with temporary access
to digital content, such as e-books, music or films via
networks. Under the current legal framework, libraries need to
obtain the authorisation of the rights holders to organise such
e-lending activities. In various Member States, publishers and
libraries are currently experimenting with different business
models for the making available of works online, including
direct supply of e-books to libraries by publishers or bundling
by aggregators.

(a) [In particular if you are a library:] Have you experienced
specific problems when trying to negotiate agreements to enable
the electronic lending (e-lending), including across borders, of
books or other materials held in your collection?

(b) [In particular if you are an end user/consumer:] Have you
experienced specific problems when trying to borrow books or
other materials electronically (e-lending), including across
borders, from institutions such as public libraries?

(c) [In particular if you are a right holder:] Have you
negotiated agreements with libraries to enable them to lend
books or other materials electronically, including across
borders?

 YES – Please explain with specific examples

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO

 NO OPINION

If there are problems, how would they best be solved?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

The following two questions are relevant both to this point (n°
3) and the previous one (n° 2).

[In particular if you are an institutional user:] What
differences do you see in the management of physical and online
collections, including providing access to your subscribers?
What problems have you encountered?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

[In particular if you are a right holder:] What difference do
you see between libraries’ traditional activities such as
on-premises consultation or public lending and activities such
as off-premises (online, at a distance) consultation and
e-lending? What problems have you encountered?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Mass digitisation

The term “mass digitisation” is normally used to refer to
efforts by institutions such as libraries and archives to
digitise (e.g. scan) the entire content or part of their
collections with an objective to preserve these collections
and, normally, to make them available to the public. Examples
are efforts by libraries to digitise novels form the early part
of the 20th century or whole collections of pictures of
historical value. This matter has been partly addressed at the
EU level by the 2011 Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) on key
principles on the digitisation and making available of out
of commerce works (i.e. works which are no longer found in the
normal channels of commerce), which is aiming to facilitate mass
digitisation efforts (for books and learned journals) on the
basis of licence agreements between libraries and similar
cultural institutions on the one hand and the collecting
societies representing authors and publishers on the other44

You will find more information about his MoU on the following
website:
http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/copyright/out-of-commerce/index_en.htm
.

. Provided the required funding is ensured (digitisation
projects are extremely expensive), the result of this MoU
should be that books that are currently to be found only in the
archives of, for instance, libraries will be digitised and made
available online to everyone. The MoU is based on voluntary
licences (granted by Collective Management Organisations on the
basis of the mandates they receive from authors and publishers).
Some Member States may need to enact legislation to ensure the
largest possible effect of such licences (e.g. by establishing
in legislation a presumption of representation of a collecting
society or the recognition of an “extended effect” to the
licences granted)45

France and Germany have already adopted legislation to back the
effects of the MoU. The French act (LOI n° 2012-287 du 1er mars
2012 relative à l'exploitation numérique des livres
indisponibles du xxe siècle) foresees collective management,
unless the author or publisher in question opposes such
management. The German act (Gesetz zur Nutzung verwaister und
vergriffener Werke und einer weiteren Änderung des
Urheberrechtsgesetzes vom 1. Oktober 2013) contains a legal
presumption of representation by a collecting society in
relation to works whose rightholders are not members of the
collecting society.

.

[In particular if you are an institutional user, engaging or
wanting to engage in mass digitisation projects, a right
holder, a collective management organisation:] Would it be
necessary in your country to enact legislation to ensure that
the results of the 2011 MoU (i.e. the agreements concluded
between libraries and collecting societies) have a cross-border
effect so that out of commerce works can be accessed across the
EU?

 YES – Please explain why and how it could best be achieved

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO OPINION

Would it be necessary to develop mechanisms, beyond those
already agreed for other types of content (e.g. for audio- or
audio-visual collections, broadcasters’ archives)?

 YES – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO OPINION

Teaching

Directive 2001/29/EC46

Article 5(3)a of Directive 2001/29.

enables Member States to implement in their national legislation
limitations and exceptions for the purpose of illustration for
non-commercial teaching. Such exceptions would typically allow
a teacher to use parts of or full works to illustrate his
course, e.g. by distributing copies of fragments of a book or
of newspaper articles in the classroom or by showing protected
content on a smart board without having to obtain authorisation
from the right holders. The open formulation of this (optional)
provision allows for rather different implementation at Member
States level. The implementation of the exception differs from
Member State to Member State, with several Member States
providing instead a framework for the licensing of content for
certain educational uses. Some argue that the law should
provide for better possibilities for distance learning and
study at home.

(a) [In particular if you are an end user/consumer or an
institutional user:] Have you experienced specific problems
when trying to use works or other subject-matter for
illustration for teaching, including across borders?

(b) [In particular if you are a right holder:] Have you
experienced specific problems resulting from the way in which
works or other subject-matter are used for illustration for
teaching, including across borders?

 YES – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO

 NO OPINION

If there are problems, how would they best be solved?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

What mechanisms exist in the market place to facilitate the use
of content for illustration for teaching purposes? How
successful are they?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

If your view is that a legislative solution is needed, what
would be its main elements? Which activities of the beneficiary
institutions should be covered and under what conditions?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

If your view is that a different solution is needed, what would
it be?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Research

Directive 2001/29/EC47

Article 5(3)a of Directive 2001/29.

enables Member States to choose whether to implement in their
national laws a limitation for the purpose of non-commercial
scientific research. The open formulation of this (optional)
provision allows for rather different implementations at Member
States level.

(a) [In particular if you are an end user/consumer or an
institutional user:] Have you experienced specific problems
when trying to use works or other subject matter in the context
of research projects/activities, including across borders?

(b) [In particular if you are a right holder:] Have you
experienced specific problems resulting from the way in which
works or other subject-matter are used in the context of
research projects/activities, including across borders?

 YES – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO

 NO OPINION

If there are problems, how would they best be solved?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

What mechanisms exist in the Member States to facilitate the use
of content for research purposes? How successful are they?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Disabilities

Directive 2001/29/EC48

Article 5 (3)b of Directive 2001/29.

provides for an exception/limitation for the benefit of people
with a disability. The open formulation of this (optional)
provision allows for rather different implementations at Member
States level. At EU and international level projects have been
launched to increase the accessibility of works and other
subject-matter for persons with disabilities (notably by
increasing the number of works published in special formats and
facilitating their distribution across the European Union) 49

The European Trusted Intermediaries Network (ETIN) resulting
from a Memorandum of Understanding between representatives of
the right-holder community (publishers, authors, collecting
societies) and interested parties such as associations for
blind and dyslexic persons
(http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/copyright/initiatives/access/index_en.htm)
and the Trusted Intermediary Global Accessible Resources (TIGAR)
project in WIPO (http://www.visionip.org/portal/en/).

.

The Marrakesh Treaty50

Marrakesh Treaty to Facilitate Access to Published Works by
Visually Impaired Persons and Persons with Print Disabilities,
Marrakesh, June 17 to 28 2013.

has been adopted to facilitate access to published works for
persons who are blind, visually impaired, or otherwise print
disabled. The Treaty creates a mandatory exception to copyright
that allows organisations for the blind to produce, distribute
and make available accessible format copies to visually
impaired persons without the authorisation of the rightholders.
The EU and its Member States have started work to sign and
ratify the Treaty. This may require the adoption of certain
provisions at EU level (e.g. to ensure the possibility to
exchange accessible format copies across borders).

(a) [In particular if you are a person with a disability or an
organisation representing persons with disabilities:] Have you
experienced problems with accessibility to content, including
across borders, arising from Member States’ implementation of
this exception?

(b) [In particular if you are an organisation providing services
for persons with disabilities:] Have you experienced problems
when distributing/communicating works published in special
formats across the EU?

(c) [In particular if you are a right holder:] Have you
experienced specific problems resulting from the application of
limitations or exceptions allowing for the
distribution/communication of works published in special
formats, including across borders?

 YES – Please explain by giving examples

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO

 NO OPINION

If there are problems, what could be done to improve
accessibility?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

What mechanisms exist in the market place to facilitate
accessibility to content? How successful are they?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Text and data mining

Text and data mining/content mining/data analytics51

For the purpose of the present document, the term “text and data
mining” will be used.

are different terms used to describe increasingly important
techniques used in particular by researchers for the
exploration of vast amounts of existing texts and data (e.g.,
journals, web sites, databases etc.). Through the use of
software or other automated processes, an analysis is made of
relevant texts and data in order to obtain new insights,
patterns and trends.

The texts and data used for mining are either freely accessible
on the internet or accessible through subscriptions to e.g.
journals and periodicals that give access to the databases of
publishers. A copy is made of the relevant texts and data (e.g.
on browser cache memories or in computers RAM memories or onto
the hard disk of a computer), prior to the actual analysis.
Normally, it is considered that to mine protected works or
other subject matter, it is necessary to obtain authorisation
from the right holders for the making of such copies unless
such authorisation can be implied (e.g. content accessible to
general public without restrictions on the internet, open
access).

Some argue that the copies required for text and data mining are
covered by the exception for temporary copies in Article 5.1 of
Directive 2001/29/EC. Others consider that text and data mining
activities should not even be seen as covered by copyright. None
of this is clear, in particular since text and data mining does
not consist only of a single method, but can be undertaken in
several different ways. Important questions also remain as to
whether the main problems arising in relation to this issue go
beyond copyright (i.e. beyond the necessity or not to obtain
the authorisation to use content) and relate rather to the need
to obtain “access” to content (i.e. being able to use e.g.
commercial databases).

A specific Working Group was set up on this issue in the
framework of the "Licences for Europe" stakeholder dialogue. No
consensus was reached among participating stakeholders on either
the problems to be addressed or the results. At the same time,
practical solutions to facilitate text and data mining of
subscription-based scientific content were presented by
publishers as an outcome of “Licences for Europe”52

See the document “Licences for Europe – ten pledges to bring
more content online”:
http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/copyright/docs/licences-for-europe/131113_ten-pledges_en.pdf
.

. In the context of these discussions, other stakeholders argued
that no additional licences should be required to mine material
to which access has been provided through a subscription
agreement and considered that a specific exception for text and
data mining should be introduced, possibly on the basis of
a distinction between commercial and non-commercial.

(a) [In particular if you are an end user/consumer or an
institutional user:] Have you experienced obstacles, linked to
copyright, when trying to use text or data mining methods,
including across borders?

(b) [In particular if you are a service provider:] Have you
experienced obstacles, linked to copyright, when providing
services based on text or data mining methods, including across
borders?

(c) [In particular if you are a right holder:] Have you
experienced specific problems resulting from the use of text
and data mining in relation to copyright protected content,
including across borders?

 YES – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO OPINION

If there are problems, how would they best be solved?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

If your view is that a legislative solution is needed, what
would be its main elements? Which activities should be covered
and under what conditions?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

If your view is that a different solution is needed, what would
it be?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Are there other issues, unrelated to copyright, that constitute
barriers to the use of text or data mining methods?

[Open question] ……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

User-generated content

Technological and service developments mean that citizens can
copy, use and distribute content at little to no financial
cost. As a consequence, new types of online activities are
developing rapidly, including the making of so-called
“user-generated content”. While users can create totally
original content, they can also take one or several
pre-existing works, change something in the work(s), and upload
the result on the Internet e.g. to platforms and blogs53

A typical example could be the “kitchen” or “wedding” video
(adding one's own video to a pre-existing sound recording), or
adding one's own text to a pre-existing photograph. Other
examples are “mash-ups” (blending two sound recordings), and
reproducing parts of journalistic work (report, review etc.) in
a blog.

. User-generated content (UGC) can thus cover the modification
of pre-existing works even if the newly-generated/"uploaded"
work does not necessarily require a creative effort and results
from merely adding, subtracting or associating some pre-existing
content with other pre-existing content. This kind of activity
is not “new” as such. However, the development of social
networking and social media sites that enable users to share
content widely has vastly changed the scale of such activities
and increased the potential economic impact for those holding
rights in the pre-existing works. Re-use is no longer the
preserve of a technically and artistically adept elite. With
the possibilities offered by the new technologies, re-use is
open to all, at no cost. This in turn raises questions with
regard to fundamental rights such the freedom of expression and
the right to property.

A specific Working Group was set up on this issue in the
framework of the "Licences for Europe" stakeholder dialogue. No
consensus was reached among participating stakeholders on either
the problems to be addressed or the results or even the
definition of UGC. Nevertheless, a wide range of views were
presented as to the best way to respond to this phenomenon. One
view was to say that a new exception is needed to cover UGC, in
particular non-commercial activities by individuals such as
combining existing musical works with videos, sequences of
photos, etc. Another view was that no legislative change is
needed: UGC is flourishing, and licensing schemes are
increasingly available (licence schemes concluded between
rightholders and platforms as well as micro-licences concluded
between rightholders and the users generating the content. In
any event, practical solutions to ease user-generated content
and facilitate micro-licensing for small users were pledged by
rightholders across different sectors as a result of the
“Licences for Europe” discussions54

See the document “Licences for Europe – ten pledges to bring
more content online”:
http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/copyright/docs/licences-for-europe/131113_ten-pledges_en.pdf
.

.

(a) [In particular if you are an end user/consumer:] Have you
experienced problems when trying to use pre-existing works or
other subject matter to disseminate new content on the
Internet, including across borders?

(b) [In particular if you are a service provider:] Have you
experienced problems when users publish/disseminate new content
based on the pre-existing works or other subject-matter through
your service, including across borders?

(c) [In particular if you are a right holder:] Have you
experienced problems resulting from the way the users are using
pre-existing works or other subject-matter to disseminate new
content on the Internet, including across borders?

 YES – Please explain by giving examples

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO

 NO OPINION

(a) [In particular if you are an end user/consumer or a right
holder:] Have you experienced problems when trying to ensure
that the work you have created (on the basis of pre-existing
works) is properly identified for online use? Are proprietary
systems sufficient in this context?

(b) [In particular if you are a service provider:] Do you
provide possibilities for users that are
publishing/disseminating the works they have created (on the
basis of pre-existing works) through your service to properly
identify these works for online use?

 YES – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO OPINION

(a) [In particular if you are an end user/consumer or a right
holder):] Have you experienced problems when trying to be
remunerated for the use of the work you have created (on the
basis of pre-existing works)?

(b) [In particular if you are a service provider:] Do you
provide remuneration schemes for users publishing/disseminating
the works they have created (on the basis of pre-existing works)
through your service?

 YES – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO OPINION

If there are problems, how would they best be solved?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

If your view is that a legislative solution is needed, what
would be its main elements? Which activities should be covered
and under what conditions?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

If your view is that a different solution is needed, what would
it be?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Private copying and reprography

Directive 2001/29/EC enables Member States to implement in their
national legislation exceptions or limitations to the
reproduction right for copies made for private use and
photocopying55

Article 5. 2)(a) and (b) of Directive 2001/29.

. Levies are charges imposed at national level on goods
typically used for such purposes (blank media, recording
equipment, photocopying machines, mobile listening devices such
as mp3/mp4 players, computers, etc.) with a view to compensating
rightholders for the harm they suffer when copies are made
without their authorisation by certain categories of persons
(i.e. natural persons making copies for their private use) or
through use of certain technique (i.e. reprography). In that
context, levies are important for rightholders.

With the constant developments in digital technology, the
question arises as to whether the copying of files by
consumers/end-users who have purchased content online - e.g.
when a person has bought an MP3 file and goes on to store
multiple copies of that file (in her computer, her tablet and
her mobile phone) - also triggers, or should trigger, the
application of private copying levies. It is argued that, in
some cases, these levies may indeed be claimed by rightholders
whether or not the licence fee paid by the service provider
already covers copies made by the end user. This approach could
potentially lead to instances of double payments whereby levies
could be claimed on top of service providers’ licence fees56

Communication "Unleashing the Potential of Cloud Computing in
Europe", COM(2012) 529 final.

57

These issues were addressed in the recommendations of Mr António
Vitorino resulting from the mediation on private copying and
reprography levies. You can consult these recommendations on
the following website:
http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/copyright/docs/levy_reform/130131_levies-vitorino-recommendations_en.pdf.

.

There is also an on-going discussion as to the application or
not of levies to certain types of cloud-based services such as
personal lockers or personal video recorders.

In your view, is there a need to clarify at the EU level the
scope and application of the private copying and reprography
exceptions58

Art. 5.2(a) and 5.2(b) of Directive 2001/29/EC.

in the digital environment?

 YES – Please explain

Yes. Acts in the digital environment are unnecessarily and
inappropriately restricted in ways which are clearly not
"fair". Completely personal and private acts such as backing up
digital media, moving media from one storage device to another
(or even one disk directory to another), format shifting, time
shifting, etc are restricted (even if unlikely to be taken to
court). These actions should be made explicitly legal, across
all EU states. Better still, a move to a "fair use" system
would quickly result in courts settling that these are all
fair. .

 NO – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO OPINION

Should digital copies made by end users for private purposes in
the context of a service that has been licensed by
rightholders, and where the harm to the rightholder is minimal,
be subject to private copying levies?59

This issue was also addressed in the recommendations of Mr
Antonio Vitorino resulting from the mediation on private
copying and reprography levies

 YES – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO – Please explain

No. There are two separate cases:

1) Content that has been sold to the user (or appears to the
user to have been sold, even if the vendor attempts to claim it
has only been licensed). In this case most private purposes
(such as backup, format shifting, time shifting, etc) should be
freely permissable as well as normal rights of resale, loan etc.
In none of these cases is any levy justified.

2) Content that has been clearly made available under a
restrictive licence, for a substantially reduced price, such as
a video rental. Again, private uses which just allow the user to
make use of the rental (such as changing a format so it can be
played on a particular device) should not be restricted or
subject to a levy. Keeping the work beyond the rental period
would normally be prevented using DRM and should remain illegal
-- no private copying levy would be needed.

In general private copying levies are unfair in that they do not
only apply to people that copy copyrighted works beyond normal
fair use. For example, blank media levies are paid by all those
(like me) who never copy copyrighted material in an unfair way.
.

 NO OPINION

How would changes in levies with respect to the application to
online services (e.g. services based on cloud computing
allowing, for instance, users to have copies on different
devices) impact the development and functioning of new business
models on the one hand and rightholders’ revenue on the other?

[Open question]

These new services just make the system of levies even less
relevant and illustrate why it was a bad idea in the first
place. Things like automatic cloud backup clearly do not create
real "copies" and do not require any compensation to
rightsholders. Levies should be abandonned and the EU should
concentrate on encouraging rights holders to innovate in
monetising their content. .

Would you see an added value in making levies visible on the
invoices for products subject to levies?60

This issue was also addressed in the recommendations of Mr
Antonio Vitorino resulting from the mediation on private
copying and reprography levies.

 YES – Please explain

Absolutely. The user needs to know what levies are being applied
so that they can participate (if they wish) in the democratic
process to define what levies are applied and, equally
importantly, how the money is used and distributed. Any
suggestion that levies are not made visible implies that the
proposer has insufficient confidence in the system standing up
to widespread public scrutiny. .

 NO – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO OPINION

Diverging national systems levy different products and apply
different tariffs. This results in obstacles to the free
circulation of goods and services in the Single Market. At the
same time, many Member States continue to allow the
indiscriminate application of private copying levies to all
transactions irrespective of the person to whom the product
subject to a levy is sold (e.g. private person or business). In
that context, not all Member States have ex ante exemption
and/or ex post reimbursement schemes which could remedy these
situations and reduce the number of undue payments61

This issue was also addressed in the recommendations of Mr
Antonio Vitorino resulting from the mediation on private
copying and reprography levies.

.

Have you experienced a situation where a cross-border
transaction resulted in undue levy payments, or duplicate
payments of the same levy, or other obstacles to the free
movement of goods or services?

 YES – Please specify the type of transaction and indicate
the percentage of the undue payments. Please also indicate how
a priori exemption and/or ex post reimbursement schemes could
help to remedy the situation.

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO OPINION

What percentage of products subject to a levy is sold to persons
other than natural persons for purposes clearly unrelated to
private copying? Do any of those transactions result in undue
payments? Please explain in detail the example you provide
(type of products, type of transaction, stakeholders, etc.).

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Where such undue payments arise, what percentage of trade do
they affect? To what extent could a priori exemptions and/or ex
post reimbursement schemes existing in some Member States help
to remedy the situation?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

If you have identified specific problems with the current
functioning of the levy system, how would these problems best
be solved?

[Open question]

1) Levies apply to people who never make copies.

2) Levies apply to copying of non-copyrighted material, material
in which I own the copyright (my photos, etc), and copying which
is "fair" and permitted.

3) Levies are not distributed based on which authors I consume.
For example, I do not listen to pop music, and I doubt if any
of the authors I read have ever received a cent from a levy.

4) The supposed harm being done to authors has never been
proven. In almost all cases, no purchase is being prevented
because of the copying. And in many cases (such as school
children sharing music) sales are almost certainly increased by
the promotion. .

Fair remuneration of authors and performers

The EU copyright acquis recognises for authors and performers a
number of exclusive rights and, in the case of performers whose
performances are fixed in phonograms, remuneration rights. There
are few provisions in the EU copyright law governing the
transfer of rights from authors or performers to producers62

See e.g. Directive 92/100/EEC, Art.2(4)-(7).

or determining who the owner of the rights is when the work or
other subject matter is created in the context of an employment
contract63

See e.g. Art. 2.3. of Directive 2009/24/EC, Art. 4 of Directive
96/9/EC.

. This is an area that has been traditionally left for Member
States to regulate and there are significant differences in
regulatory approaches. Substantial differences also exist
between different sectors of the creative industries.

Concerns continue to be raised that authors and performers are
not adequately remunerated, in particular but not solely, as
regards online exploitation. Many consider that the economic
benefit of new forms of exploitation is not being fairly shared
along the whole value chain. Another commonly raised issue
concerns contractual practices, negotiation mechanisms,
presumptions of transfer of rights, buy-out clauses and the
lack of possibility to terminate contracts. Some stakeholders
are of the opinion that rules at national level do not suffice
to improve their situation and that action at EU level is
necessary.

[In particular if you are an author/performer:] What is the best
mechanism (or combination of mechanisms) to ensure that you
receive an adequate remuneration for the exploitation of your
works and performances?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Is there a need to act at the EU level (for instance to prohibit
certain clauses in contracts)?

 YES – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO – Please explain why

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO OPINION

If you consider that the current rules are not effective, what
would you suggest to address the shortcomings you identify?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Respect for rights

Directive 2004/48/EE64

Directive 2004/48/EC of the European Parliament and of the
Council of 29 April 2004 on the enforcement of intellectual
property rights.

provides for a harmonised framework for the civil enforcement of
intellectual property rights, including copyright and related
rights. The Commission has consulted broadly on this text65

You will find more information on the following website:
http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/iprenforcement/directive/index_en.htm


. Concerns have been raised as to whether some of its provisions
are still fit to ensure a proper respect for copyright in the
digital age. On the one hand, the current measures seem to be
insufficient to deal with the new challenges brought by the
dissemination of digital content on the internet; on the other
hand, there are concerns about the current balance between
enforcement of copyright and the protection of fundamental
rights, in particular the right for a private life and data
protection. While it cannot be contested that enforcement
measures should always be available in case of infringement of
copyright, measures could be proposed to strengthen respect for
copyright when the infringed content is used for a commercial
purpose66

For example when the infringing content is offered on a website
which gets advertising revenues that depend on the volume of
traffic.

. One means to do this could be to clarify the role of
intermediaries in the IP infrastructure67

This clarification should not affect the liability regime of
intermediary service providers established by Directive
2000/31/EC on electronic commerce, which will remain unchanged.

. At the same time, there could be clarification of the
safeguards for respect of private life and data protection for
private users.

Should the civil enforcement system in the EU be rendered more
efficient for infringements of copyright committed with a
commercial purpose?

 YES – Please explain

But only for enforcement of rights by small rightsholders
against large corporations (such as misuse of photos taken from
the Internet).

Large rightsholders need no further efficiencies – they already
have access to very efficient schemes and have plenty of
resources to deploy. In addition, they routinely create
massively exaggerated estimates of losses.

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO OPINION

In particular, is the current legal framework clear enough to
allow for sufficient involvement of intermediaries (such as
Internet service providers, advertising brokers, payment
service providers, domain name registrars, etc.) in inhibiting
online copyright infringements with a commercial purpose? If
not, what measures would be useful to foster the cooperation of
intermediaries?

[Open question]

The current framework is not clear enough. However, the basic
principle needs to be that almost all intermediaries have no
role to play and should be protected by the courts from
liability. The enforcement process needs to be based around
court decisions, not decisions taken by private bodies.

The framework needs to be focused on protecting the rights of
individuals, whether accused of infringement or not. For
example, a perfectly innocent person may find that their
website is incorrectly accused of having copyrighted material
(cases of this occur every week, often based on very dumb
search programs employed by some rightsholders, and little
human supervision). It must be unacceptable for payment
companies, domain name registrars, etc to take action against
that site without a court order, which follows due process,
appeals, etc. The ISP may have some limited duty to take down
the site unless the site owner asserts they are not infringing,
at which point the ISP liability must end.

The current approach has had a chilling effect, with many
participants playing safe and preventing citizens from creating
exciting content or exercising free speech. These players need
to be protected by a requirement for courts to order any
actions to be taken. There is no evidence that the current
systems in use in some member states (let alone the ones
proposed for the future) are at all proportional to the tiny
harm being done to rightsholders, nor protective of the rights
of the individuals involved. .

Does the current civil enforcement framework ensure that the
right balance is achieved between the right to have one’s
copyright respected and other rights such as the protection of
private life and protection of personal data?

 YES – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO – Please explain

The enforcement approach needs to be recast around the
individual, not the large corporations. Human rights are being
completely ignored, and no significant harm is even proven.

Small creators need much more protection than large
corporations, but are largely denied the benefits of the
enforcement framework. There is no enforcement framework at all
aimed at preventing companies abusing the copyright of small
creators such as photographers, except an expensive court
process. Yet large companies have a cheap process to use
against individuals -- an environment in which little harm
actually occurs.

There is no evidence that the current systems in use in some
member states (let alone the ones proposed for the future) are
at all proportional to the tiny harm being done to
rightsholders, nor protective of the rights of the individuals
involved. .

 NO OPINION

A single EU Copyright Title

The idea of establishing a unified EU Copyright Title has been
present in the copyright debate for quite some time now,
although views as to the merits and the feasibility of such an
objective are divided. A unified EU Copyright Title would
totally harmonise the area of copyright law in the EU and
replace national laws. There would then be a single EU title
instead of a bundle of national rights. Some see this as the
only manner in which a truly Single Market for content
protected by copyright can be ensured, while others believe
that the same objective can better be achieved by establishing
a higher level of harmonisation while allowing for a certain
degree of flexibility and specificity in Member States’ legal
systems.

Should the EU pursue the establishment of a single EU Copyright
Title, as a means of establishing a consistent framework for
rights and exceptions to copyright across the EU, as well as a
single framework for enforcement?

 YES

 NO

 NO OPINION

Should this be the next step in the development of copyright in
the EU? Does the current level of difference among the Member
State legislation mean that this is a longer term project?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Other issues

The above questionnaire aims to provide a comprehensive
consultation on the most important matters relating to the
current EU legal framework for copyright. Should any important
matters have been omitted, we would appreciate if you could
bring them to our attention, so they can be properly addressed
in the future.

Are there any other important matters related to the EU legal
framework for copyright? Please explain and indicate how such
matters should be addressed.

[Open question]

DRM must be restricted, if it is to be protected by
anti-circumvention laws. DRM should only be used to enforce
rental agreements, with a focus on preventing inadvertent
violation of the agreement, not because of a concern over
piracy. Unauthorised non-commercial copying is a small problem,
with little proven harm, and DRM has been demonstrated many
times to be ineffective in preventing commercial piracy.

DRM interferes with many fair uses, including format shifting
and time-shifting. As an example, DRM protected content may not
be available on an airplane flight or even in a rural area if it
requires online verification. Even worse, DRM may cause content
which has been purchased to later become unavailable because
the rightsholder goes out of business and shuts down its
servers. That is a clear case of breach of contract with no
recompense for the consumer (who might call it fraud).

Protected DRM should be restricted to "rental" type scenarios,
where a significant discount is offered for accepting limited
uses. If DRM circumvention is to be prevented (for these
rentals), the DRM-free content must also be made available at a
reasonable price and to copyright libraries for preservation. .

