


Public Consultation

on the review of the EU copyright rules

Contents

I.  Introduction  2

A.  Context ofthe consultation  2

B.  How to submit replies to this questionnaire  3

C.  Confidentiality  3

II.  Rights and the functioning of the Single Market  7

A.  Why is it not possible to access many online content
services from anywhere in Europe?  7

B.  Is there a need for more clarity as regards the scope of
what needs to be authorised (or not) in digital transmissions?
10

1.  The act of “making available”  10

2.  Two rights involved in a single act of exploitation  11

3.  Linking and browsing  12

4.  Download to own digital content  13

C.  Registration of works and other subject matter – is it a
good idea?  14

D.  How to improve the use and interoperability ofidentifiers
15

E.  Term of protection – is it appropriate?  15

III.  Limitations and exceptions in the Single Market  16

A.  Access to content in libraries andarchives  19

1.  Preservation and archiving  19

2.  Off-premises access to library collections  20

3.  E – lending  21

4.  Massdigitisation  22

B.  Teaching  23

C.  Research  25

D.  Disabilities  25

E.  Text and data mining  27

F.  User-generated content  28

IV.  Private copying and reprography  31

V.  Fair remuneration of authors and performers  33

VI.  Respect for rights  34

VII.  A single EU Copyright Title  36

VIII.  Other issues  36

Introduction

Context of the consultation

Over the last two decades, digital technology and the Internet
have reshaped the ways in which content iscreated, distributed,
and accessed. New opportunities have materialised for those that
create and produce content (e.g. a film, a novel, a song), for
new and existing distribution platforms, for institutions such
as libraries, for activities such as research and for citizens
who now expect to be able to access content – for information,
education or entertainment purposes – regardless of
geographical borders.

This new environment also presents challenges. One of them is
for the market to continue to adaptto new forms of distribution
and use. Another one is for the legislator to ensure that the
system of rights, limitations to rights and enforcement remains
appropriate and is adapted to the new environment. This
consultation focuses on the second of these challenges:
ensuring that the EU copyright regulatory framework stays fit
for purpose in the digital environment to support creation and
innovation, tap the full potential of the Single Market, foster
growth and investment in our economy and promote cultural
diversity.

In its "Communication on Content in the Digital Single Market"1

COM (2012)789 final, 18/12/2012.

the Commission set out two parallel tracks of action:on the one
hand, to complete its on-going effort to review and to
modernise the EU copyright legislative framework2

As announced in the Intellectual Property Strategy ' A single
market for Intellectual Property Rights: COM (2011)287 final,
24/05/2011.

3

"Based on market studies and impact assessment and legal
drafting work"as announced in the Communication (2012)789.

with a view to a decision in 2014 on whether to table
legislative reform proposals, andon the other, to facilitate
practical industry-led solutions through the stakeholder
dialogue "Licences for Europe" on issues on which rapidprogress
was deemed necessary and possible.

The "Licences for Europe" process has been finalised now4

See the document “Licences for Europe – tem pledges to bring
more content
online”:http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/copyright/docs/licences-for-europe/131113_ten-pledges_en.pdf.

. The Commission welcomes the practical solutions stakeholders
have put forward in this context and will monitor their
progress. Pledges have been made by stakeholders in all four
Working Groups (cross border portability of services,
user-generated content, audiovisual and film heritage and text
and data mining). Taken together, the Commission expects these
pledges to be a further step in making the user environment
easier in many different situations. The Commission also takes
note of the fact that two groups – user-generated content and
text and datamining – did not reach consensus among
participating stakeholders on either the problems to be
addressed or on the results. The discussions and results of
"Licences for Europe" will be also taken into account in the
context of the review of the legislative framework.

As part of the review process, the Commission is now launching a
public consultation on issues identified in the Communication on
Content in the Digital Single Market, i.e.:"territoriality in
the Internal Market, harmonisation, limitations and exceptions
to copyright in the digital age; fragmentation of the EU
copyright market; and how to improve the effectiveness and
efficiency of enforcement while underpinning its legitimacy in
the wider context of copyright reform". As highlighted in the
October 2013 European CouncilConclusions5

EUCO 169/13, 24/25 October 2013.

"Providing digital services and content across the single market
requires the establishment of a copyright regime for the digital
age. The Commission will therefore complete its on-going review
of the EU copyright framework in spring 2014. It is important
to modernise Europe's copyright regime and facilitate
licensing, while ensuring a high level protection of
intellectual property rights and taking into account cultural
diversity".

This consultation builds on previous consultations and public
hearings, in particular those on the "Green Paper on copyright
in the knowledge economy"6

COM(2008)
466/3,http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/copyright/copyright-infso/index_en.htm#maincontentSec2.

, the "Green Paper on the online distribution of audiovisual
works"7

COM(2011) 427
final,http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/consultations/2011/audiovisual_en.htm.

and "Content Online"8

http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/consultations/2009/content_online_en.htm.

. These consultations provided valuable feedback from
stakeholders on a number of questions, on issues as diverse as
the territoriality of copyright and possible ways to overcome
territoriality, exceptions related to the online dissemination
of knowledge, and rightholders’ remuneration, particularly in
the audiovisual sector. Views were expressed by stakeholders
representing all stages in the value chain, including right
holders, distributors, consumers, and academics. The questions
elicited widely diverging views on the best way to proceed. The
"Green Paper on Copyright in the Knowledge Economy" was followed
up by a Communication. The replies to the "Green Paper on the
online distribution of audiovisual works" have fed into
subsequent discussions on the Collective Rights Management
Directive and into the current review process.

How to submit replies to this questionnaire

You are kindly asked to send your repliesby 5 February 2014as a
word or pdf document to the following e-mail address of DG
Internal Market and
Services:markt-copyright-consultation@ec.europa.eu. Please note
that replies sent after that date will not be taken into
account.

This consultation is addressed to different categories of
stakeholders. To the extent possible, the questions indicate
the category/ies of respondents most likely to be concerned by
them (annotation in brackets, before the actual question).
Respondents should nevertheless feel free to reply to any/all
of the questions. Also, please note that, apart from the
question concerning the identification of the respondent, none
of the questions is obligatory. Replies containing answers only
to part of the questions will be also accepted.

You are requested to provide your answers directly within this
consultation document. For the “Yes/No/No opinion” questions
please put the selected answer inboldandunderlineit so it is
easy for us to see your selection.

In your answers to the questions, you are invited to refer to
the situation in EU Member States.You are also invited in
particular to indicate, where relevant, what would be the
impact of options you put forward in terms of costs,
opportunitiesand revenues.

The public consultation is available in English. Responses may,
however, be sent in any of the 24 official languages of the EU.

Confidentiality

The contributions received in this round of consultation as well
as a summary report presenting the responses in a statistical
and aggregated form will be published on the website of DG
MARKT.

Please note that all contributions received will be published
together with the identity of the contributor, unless the
contributor objects to the publication of their personal data
on the grounds that such publication would harm his or her
legitimate interests. In this case, the contribution will be
published in anonymous form upon the contributor's explicit
request. Otherwise the contribution will not be published nor
will its content be reflected in the summary report.

Pleaseread ourPrivacy statement.

Please identify yourself:

In the interests of transparency, organisations (including, for
example, NGOs, trade associations and commercial enterprises)
are invited to provide the public with relevant information
about themselves by registering in the InterestRepresentative
Register and subscribing to its Code of Conduct.

If you are a Registered organisation, please indicate your
Register ID number below. Your contribution will then be
considered as representing the views of your organisation.

…………………………………………………………………………………………………..

…………………………………………………………………………………………………..

If your organisation is not registered, you have the opportunity
toregister now. Responses from organisations not registered will
be published separately.

If you would like to submit your reply on an anonymous basis
please indicate it belowby underlining the following answer:

Yes, I would like to submit my reply on an anonymous basis

Type of respondent(Pleaseunderlinethe appropriate):

End user/consumer(e.g. internet user, reader, subscriber to
music or audiovisual service, researcher, student) OR
Representative of end users/consumers

for the purposes of this questionnaire normally referred to
in questions as"end users/consumers"

Institutional user(e.g. school, university, research centre,
library, archive) OR Representative of institutional users

for the purposes of this questionnaire normally referred to
in questions as"institutional users"

Author/Performer OR Representative of authors/performers

Publisher/Producer/Broadcaster OR Representative of
publishers/producers/broadcasters

the two above categoriesare,for the purposes of this
questionnaire, normally referred to in questions as"right
holders"

Intermediary/Distributor/Other service provider(e.g. online
music or audiovisual service, games platform, social media,
search engine, ICT industry)OR Representative of
intermediaries/distributors/other service providers

for the purposesof this questionnaire normally referred to in
questions as"service providers"

Collective Management Organisation

Public authority

Member State

Other(Please explain):

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Rightsand the functioning of the Single Market

Why is it not possible to access many online content services
from anywhere in Europe?[The territorial scope of the rights
involved in digital transmissions and the segmentation of the
market through licensing agreements]

Holders of copyright and related rights – e.g. writers, singers,
musicians - do not enjoy a single protection in the EU. Instead,
they are protected on the basis of a bundle of national rights
in each Member State. Those rights have been largelyharmonised
by the existing EU Directives. However, differences remain and
the geographical scope of the rights is limited to the
territory of the Member State granting them. Copyright is thus
territorial in the sense that rights are acquired and
enforcedon a country-by-country basis under national law9

This principle has been confirmed by the Court of justice on
several occasions.

.

The dissemination of copyright-protected content on the Internet
– e.g. by a music streaming service, or by an online e-book
seller – therefore requires, in principle, an authorisation for
each national territory in which the content is communicated to
the public. Rightholders are, of course, in a position to grant
a multi-territorial or pan-European licence, such that content
services can be provided in several Member States and across
borders. A number of steps have been taken at EU level to
facilitate multi-territorial licences: the proposal for a
Directive on Collective Rights Management10

Proposal for a Directive of theEuropean Parliament and of the
Council of 11 July 2012 on collective management of copyright
and related rights and multi-territorial licensing of rights in
musical works for online uses in the internal market, COM(2012)
372 final.

should significantly facilitate the delivery of
multi-territorial licences in musical works for online
services11

Collective Management Organisations play a significant role in
the management of online rights for musical works in contrast
to the situation where online rightsare licensed directly by
right holders such as film or record producers or by newspaper
or book publishers.

; the structured stakeholder dialogue “Licences for Europe”12

You can find more information on the following website:
http://ec.europa.eu/licences-for-europe-dialogue/.

and market-led developments such as the on-going work in the
Linked Content Coalition13

You can find more information on the following
website:http://www.linkedcontentcoalition.org/.

.

"Licences for Europe" addressed in particular the specific issue
of cross-border portability, i.e. the ability of consumers
having subscribed to online services in their Member State to
keep accessing them when travelling temporarily to other Member
States. As a result, representatives of the audio-visual sector
issued a joint statement affirming their commitment to continue
working towards the further development of cross-border
portability14

See the document “Licences for Europe – tem pledges to bring
more content
online”:http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/copyright/docs/licences-for-europe/131113_ten-pledges_en.pdf.

.

Despite progress, there are continued problems with the
cross-border provision of, and access to, services. These
problems are most obvious to consumers wanting to access
services that are made available inMember States other than the
one in which they live. Not all online services are available in
all Member States and consumers face problems when trying
to access such services across borders. In some instances,
even if the “same” service is available in all Member States,
consumers cannot access the service across borders (they can
only access their “national” service, and if they try to access
the "same" service in another Member State they are redirected
to the one designated for their country of residence).

This situation may in part stem from the territoriality of
rights and difficulties associated with the clearing of rights
in different territories. Contractual clauses in licensing
agreements between right holders and distributors and/or
between distributors and end users may also be at the origin of
some of the problems (denial of access, redirection).

The main issue at stake here is, therefore, whether further
measures (legislative or non-legislative, including market-led
solutions) need to be takenat EU level in the medium term15

For possible long term measures such as the establishment of a
European Copyright Code (establishing a single title) see
section VII of this consultation document.

to increase the cross-border availability of content services in
the Single Market, while ensuring an adequate level of
protection for right holders.

[In particular if you are an end user/consumer:]Have you faced
problems when trying to access online services in an EU Member
State other than the one in which you live?

 YES - Please provide examples indicating the Member State,
the sector and the type of content concerned (e.g. premium
content such as certain films and TV series, audio-visual
content in general, music, e-books, magazines, journals
andnewspapers, games, applications and other software)

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO

 NO OPINION

[In particular if you are a service provider:]Have you faced
problems when seeking to provide online services across borders
in the EU?

 YES - Please explain whether such problems, in your
experience, are related to copyright or to other issues (e.g.
business decisions relating to the cost of providing services
across borders, compliance with other laws such asconsumer
protection)? Please provide examples indicating the Member
State, the sector and the type of content concerned (e.g.
premium content such as certain films and TV series,
audio-visual content in general, music, e-books, magazines,
journals and newspapers, games, applications and other
software).

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO

 NO OPINION

[In particular if you are a right holder or a collective
management organisation:]How often are you asked togrant
multi-territorial licences? Please indicate, if possible, the
number of requests per year and provide examples indicating the
Member State, the sector and the type of content concerned.

[Open question]

Authors generally have “exclusive rights” without borders, so
they can licence the exploitation of the work without borders
as well. But in the EU’s audiovisual sector authors usually
assign their rights for the whole world to the producer. Their
works are exploited globally by the producer who can license
the exploitation rights for various modes of exploitation and
territories. Audiovisual authors are neither able to control
the distribution of their works, nor the remuneration for the
exploitation of their works. The European film and audiovisual
sector are fragmented into several markets based on languages
and types of exploitation of the works. Most audiovisual
(online) media services, target specific markets. These
services do not need and therefore do not request
multi-territorial licences. Because there is no harmonization
of collective rights management in the audiovisual sector, in
particular for authors’ rights, only a few audiovisual authors’
CMOs (e.g. in Belgium, France, Italy, Spain and Switzerland) are
able to clear online rights for their repertoire. In other
countries, such as Austria, online rights for audiovisual works
are individually managed (by the producers). Of course
audiovisual authors want their works to be widely accessible on
online services. They are interested in developinga model for
the collection and distribution of audiovisual authors’
remuneration for the online exploitation of their works. One
major obstacle is that only a few audiovisual authors’ CMOs are
entitled to clear the online rights for their repertoire.
Thisreduces the interest of service providers for such a
multi-territorial licence. This lack of harmonisation is an
obstacle to pan-European online rights clearance for European
audiovisual works. The Commission is also unclear about the
cooperation possibilities between CMOs and generally prefers to
encourage competition. There is also no harmonisation of the tax
treatment of cross-border royalty payments between Member
States. If CMOs from different Member States develop a common
licensing platform, they expose their members to an additional
layer of withholding tax. These problems should be urgently
solved by the Commission.

If you have identified problems in the answers to any of the
questions above – what would be the best way to tackle them?

[Open question]

￼￼The European legislator should provide audiovisual authors
with a harmonised guarantee of remuneration for the online
exploitation of their works that can be exercised by their
CMOs. This should be implemented by an unwaivable and
inalienableright to remuneration enforced through a scheme
where CMOs are entrusted to collect the remuneration at the
level of the final distributors. In the audiovisual sector,
after the initial transfer of the authors’ making available
right to the producer, thisright is usually split territorially
and ￼transferred to many different operators. The contractual
chain back to authors is very long and easily broken if one
element of the chain experience difficulties (e.g. an
intermediary going out of business) so thatthe authors rarely
receive any remuneration based on the exploitation of the work.
Collective management should therefore guarantee actual
remuneration for the online exploitation of audiovisual works
for the authors, and be helpful to users who know where to get
the licences from.

[In particular if you are a right holder or a collective
management organisation:]Are there reasons why, even in cases
where you hold all the necessary rights for all the territories
in question, you would still find itnecessary or justified to
impose territorialrestrictions on a service provider (in order,
for instance, to ensure that access to certain content is not
possible in certain European countries)?

 YES – Please explain by giving examples

“Territorial restrictions” are more often a “cultural” than a
“legal” problem. If you e.g. think about traditional dialect
singers and musicians, one can hardly imagine a common internal
market because of cultural and/or linguistic differences and
interests within the various groups of consumers. Of course
audiovisual authors want their works to be accessible all over
Europe as long as all required authorisations have been
regularly acquired from the producers. In fact there is no
distributor in Europe that is able to exploitaudiovisual works
in all countries for all modes of exploitation. Even
audiovisual media services, who could technically exploit
audiovisual works on a worldwide basis, target specific markets
and actively promote their catalogue only in a limited numberof
languages. Therefore one can doubt the actual need of these
services to acquire pan-European rights if they do not exercise
them. Of course licences should match the exploitation
prospects.

 NO

 NO OPINION

[In particular if you are e.g. a broadcaster or a service
provider:]Are there reasons why, even in cases where you have
acquired all the necessary rights for all the territories in
question, you would still find it necessary or justified to
impose territorial restrictions on the service recipient(in
order for instance, to redirect the consumer to a different
website than the one he is trying to access)?

 YES – Please explain by giving examples

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO

 NO OPINION

Do you think that further measures (legislative or
non-legislative, including market-led solutions) are needed at
EU level to increase the cross-border availability of content
services in the Single Market, while ensuring an adequate level
of protection for right holders?

 YES – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO – Please explain

There is no need for legislative changes to increase the
cross-border availability of content services in the internal
market,as the current legal copyright framework is no obstacle
to achieve that goal. The Commission should consider legal
initiatives to ensure a system of higher protection for
rightholders and fair remuneration for the usage of their
works. Also the liabilityprovisions of the E-Commerce Directive
for Internet providers should possibly berevised by the
Commission. Beyond that, the European legislator should ensure
that audiovisual authors are remunerated for the online
distribution of their works, independently of the country of
production and exploitation. With such a level playing field,
authors’ collective management organisations, entrusted to
manage the making available remuneration of audiovisual authors
could develop “one-stop-shops” to offer a single licence point
to online operators. This will, in turn, make it easier for
them to pay the remuneration due to the European audiovisual
authors of the works in their catalogue. This must be a
priority for the Commission to ensure that audiovisual authors
areremunerated for the on-demand exploitation of their works
whatever the country of exploitation.

 NO OPINION

Is there a need for more clarity as regards the scope of what
needs to be authorised (or not) in digital transmissions?[The
definition of the rights involved in digital transmissions]

The EU framework for the protection of copyright and related
rights in the digital environment is largely established by
Directive 2001/29/EC16

Directive 2001/29/EC of the European Parliament and of the
Council of 22May 2001 on the harmonisation of certain aspects
of copyright and related rights in the information society.

on the harmonisation of certain aspects of copyright and related
rights in the information society. OtherEU directives in this
field that are relevant in the online environment are those
relating to the protection of software17

Directive 2009/24/EC of the European Parliament and of the
Council of 23 April 2009 on the legal protection of computer
programs.

and databases18

Directive 96/9/EC of theEuropean Parliament and of the Council
of 11 March 1996 on the legal protection of databases.

.

Directive 2001/29/ECharmonises the rights of authors and
neighbouring rightholders19

Film and record producers, performers and broadcasters are
holders of so-called “neighbouring rights” in, respectively,
their films, records, performances and broadcast. Authors’
content protected by copyright is referred to as a “work” or
“works”, while content protected by neighbouring rights is
referred to as “other subject matter”.

which are essential for the transmission of digital copies of
works (e.g. an e-book) and other protected subject matter (e.g.
a record in a MP3 format) over the internet or similar digital
networks.

The most relevant rights for digital transmissions are the
reproduction right, i.e. the right to authorise or prohibit the
making of copies20

The right to “authorise or prohibit direct or indirect,
temporary or permanent reproduction by any means and in any
form, in whole or in part” (see Art. 2 of Directive 2001/29/EC)
although temporary acts of reproduction of a transient or
incidental nature are, under certain conditions, excluded (see
art. 5(1) of Directive 2001/29/EC).

, (notably relevant at the start of the transmission – e.g. the
uploading of adigital copy of a work to a server in view of
making it available – and at the users’ end – e.g. when a user
downloads a digital copy of a work) and the communication to
the public/making available right, i.e. the rights to authorise
or prohibit the dissemination of the works in digital networks21

The right to authorise or prohibit any communication to the
public by wire or wireless means and to authorise or prohibit
the making available to the public “on demand” (see Art. 3 of
Directive 2001/29/EC).

.These rights are intrinsically linked in digital transmissions
and both need to be cleared.

The act of “making available”

Directive 2001/29/EC specifies neitherwhatis covered by the
making available right (e.g. the upload, the accessibility by
the public, the actual reception by the public) norwherethe act
of “making available” takes place. This does not raise questions
if the act is limited to a single territory. Questions arise
however when the transmission covers several territories and
rights needto be cleared (does the act of "making available"
happen in the country of the upload only? in each of the
countries where the content is potentially accessible? in each
of the countries where the content is effectively accessed?).
The most recent case lawof the Court of Justice of the European
Union (CJEU) suggests that a relevant criterion is the
“targeting” of a certain Member State's public22

See in particular Case C-173/11 (Football Dataco vs Sportradar)
and Case C-5/11 (Donner) for copyright and related rights, and
Case C-324/09 (L’Oréal vs eBay) for trademarks. With regard to
jurisdiction see also joined Cases C-585/08 and C-144/09
(Pammer and Hotel Alpenhof) and pending CaseC-441/13 (Pez
Hejduk); see however, adopting a different approach, Case
C-170/12 (Pinckney vs KDG Mediatech).

. According to this approach the copyright-relevant act (which
has to be licensed) occurs at least in those countries which
are “targeted” by the online service provider. A service
provider “targets” a group of customers residing in a specific
country when it directs its activity to that group, e.g. via
advertisement, promotions, a language or a currency
specifically targeted at that group.

Is the scope of the “making available” right in cross-border
situations – i.e. whencontent is disseminated across borders –
sufficiently clear?

 YES

 NO – Please explain how this could be clarified and what
type of clarification would be required (e.g. as in "targeting"
approach explained above, as in "country of origin" approach23

The objective of implementing a “country of origin” approach is
to localise the copyright relevant act that must be licenced in
a single Member State (the "country of origin", which could be
for example the Member State in which the content is uploaded
orwhere the service provider is established), regardless of in
how many Member States the work can be accessed or received.
Such an approach has already been introduced at EU level with
regard to broadcasting by satellite (see Directive 93/83/EEC on
the coordination of certain rules concerning copyright and
rights related to copyright applicable to satellite
broadcasting and cable retransmission).

)

Online audiovisual media services should work more with
rightholders at the origin of the production and distribution
of works in order to secure online exploitation rights for
cross-border services.

 NO OPINION

[In particular if you are a right holder:]Could a clarification
of the territorial scope of the “making available” right have
an effect on therecognition of your rights (e.g. whether you
are considered to be an author or not, whether you are
considered to have transferred your rights or not), on your
remuneration, or on the enforcement of rights (including the
availability of injunctive relief24

Injunctive relief is a temporary or permanent remedy allowing
the right holder to stop or prevent an infringement of his/her
right.

)?

 YES – Please explain how such potential effects could be
addressed

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO

 NO OPINION

Two rights involved in a single act of exploitation

Each act of transmission in digital networks entails (in the
current state of technology and law) several reproductions.
This means that there are two rights that apply to digital
transmissions: the reproduction right and the making available
right. This may complicate the licensing of works for online
use notably when the two rights are held by different
persons/entities.

[In particular if you a service provider or a right holder:]Does
the application of two rights to a single act of economic
exploitation in the online environment (e.g. a download) create
problems for you?

 YES – Please explain what type of measures would be needed
in order to address such problems (e.g. facilitation of joint
licences when the rights are in different hands, legislation to
achieve the "bundling of rights")

The “reproduction right” and the “making available right” are
two different exclusive rights provided by
international,European and national copyright laws and their
separate application has never created any problems from a
practical point of view. Usually rightholders cooperate with
each other to provide services with the relevant rights. Above
that in the audiovisual sector both rights are usually managed
by the same entities. In the offline-world in broadcasting
(broadcasting rights, mechanical rights for a broadcast) the
practice of licensing two rights for one exploitation exists
for a long time and has not caused anyproblems so far. With
regard to the “online-rights” for online exploitations, I have
not experienced any difficulties in the licensing practice
either.

 NO

 NO OPINION

Linking and browsing

Hyperlinks are references to data that lead a user from
onelocation in the Internet to another. They are indispensable
for the functioning of the Internet as a network. Several cases
are pending before the CJEU25

Cases C-466/12 (Svensson), C-348/13 (Bestwater International)
and C-279/13 (C More entertainment).

in which the question has been raised whether the provision of
a clickable link constitutes an act of communication to the
public/making available to the public subject to the
authorisation of the rightholder.

A user browsing the internet (e.g. viewing aweb-page) regularly
creates temporary copies of works and other subject-matter
protected under copyright on the screen and in the 'cache'
memory of his computer. A question has been referred to the
CJEU26

Case C-360/13 (Public Relations Consultants Association Ltd).
See
alsohttp://www.supremecourt.gov.uk/decided-cases/docs/UKSC_2011_0202_PressSummary.pdf.

as to whether such copies are always covered by themandatory
exception for temporary acts of reproduction provided for in
Article 5(1) of Directive 2001/29/EC.

Should the provision of a hyperlink leading to a work or other
subject matter protected under copyright, either in general or
under specific circumstances, be subject to the authorisation
of the rightholder?

 YES – Please explain whether you consider this to be the
case in general, or under specific circumstances, and why

￼￼I do not want to prevent the normal utilisation of the
Internet, which isbased on a wide array of hyperlinks. But of
course it has to be considered, that there are many
(technically) different ways of linking. A normal hyperlink
(i.e. a mere digital reference to content which can be found
elsewhere on the internet) has to be treated differently than
e.g. a deep, framed or embedded link. A hyperlink as such of
course should not need the authorisation of the rightholder,
but for “embedded” or “framed” links within websites,
authorisation is needed, especially if the linking generates
commercial gain. “Deep-linking” on the other hand might be
considered as an act of “communication to the public” in the
sense of the Info- Soc Directive.

 NO – Please explain whether you consider this to be the case
in general, or under specific circumstances, and why (e.g.
because it does not amount to an act of communication to the
public – or to a new public, or because it should be covered by
a copyright exception)

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO OPINION

Should the viewing of a web-page where this implies the
temporary reproduction of a work or other subject matter
protected under copyright on the screen and in the cache memory
of the user’s computer, either in general or under specific
circumstances, be subject to the authorisation of the
rightholder?

 YES – Please explain whether you consider this to be the
case in general, or under specific circumstances, and why

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO– Please explain whether you consider this to be the case
in general, or under specific circumstances, and why (e.g.
because it is or should be covered by a copyright exception)

The act of “simple viewing” should never need the authorisation
of the rightholder, independently from the medium or technology
that provides for the content or enables its viewing. “Temporary
reproductions” are covered under a mandatory copyright exception
of the Info-Soc Directive (Art 5/1). However, when the
reproduction comes from an obviously illegal platform, the
temporary reproduction - but not the viewing itself - should be
prohibited (as per the ruling in the kino.to case in Germany
where the notorious German streaming portal site offering links
to illegal films and TV series was shut down and the people
behind the portal prosecuted).

 NO OPINION

Download to own digital content

Digital content is increasingly being bought via digital
transmission (e.g. download to own). Questions arise as to the
possibility for users to dispose of the files they buy in this
manner (e.g. by selling them or by giving them as a gift). The
principle of EU exhaustion of the distribution right applies in
the case of the distribution of physical copies (e.g. when a
tangible article such as a CD or a book, etc. is sold, the
right holder cannot prevent the further distribution of that
tangible article)27

See also recital 28 of Directive 2001/29/EC.

. The issue that arises here is whether this principle can also
be applied in the case of an act of transmission equivalent in
its effect to distribution (i.e. where the buyer acquires the
property of the copy)28

In Case C-128/11 (Oracle vs. UsedSoft) the CJEU ruled that an
author cannot oppose the resale of a second-hand licence that
allows downloading his computer program from his website and
using it for an unlimited period of time. The exclusive right
of distribution of a copy of a computer program covered by such
a licence is exhausted on its first sale. While it is thus
admitted that the distributionright may be subject to
exhaustion in case of computer programs offered for download
with the right holder’s consent, the Court was careful to
emphasise that it reached this decision based on the Computer
Programs Directive. It was stressed that this exhaustion rule
constituted alex specialisin relation to the Information
Society Directive (UsedSoft, par. 51, 56).

. This raises difficult questions, notably relating to the
practical application of such an approach (how to avoid
re-sellers keeping and using a copy of a work after they have
“re-sold” it – this is often referred to as the “forward and
delete” question) as well as to the economic implications of
the creation of a second-hand market of copies of perfect
quality that never deteriorate (in contrast to the second-hand
market for physical goods).

[In particular if you are an end user/consumer:]Have you faced
restrictions when trying to resell digital files that you have
purchased (e.g. mp3 file, e-book)?

 YES – Please explain by giving examples

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO

 NO OPINION

[In particular if you are a right holder or a service provider:]
What would be the consequences of providing a legal framework
enabling the resale of previouslypurchased digital content?
Please specify per market (type of content) concerned.

[Open question]

Re-sale of protected works such as audiovisual works online
would result in new copies, and as far as “forward and delete”
technology (which erases the firstcopy from the seller’s hard
drive) isn’t applied, which still is the regular case, each
reproduction has to be authorised by the rightholders.
Providing a legal framework enabling the resale of previously
purchased digital content would actually raise moreproblems
than it solves. However, a number of issues would have to be
carefully considered. For example, whether rightholders would
be ensured a fair proportion from the proceeds from re-sales,
whether it would be feasible to obtain rightholders’
authorisation for each act of resale, whether the first sale
doctrine should apply in the digital context to content other
than software, the meaning of a “copy” for copyright purposes
(i.e. if the new copy made on the reseller platform amounts to
an infringementof the reproduction right), etc. Digital files
can be reproduced much easier than tangible data carriers and
without the loss of quality. Therefore, there is a high risk
that the resale of digital files, such as mp4/AV-files of
audiovisual works, would lead to massive misuse. Numerous
unauthorized digital copies could be sold as alleged originals.
How is the purchaser to know, if he bought the original or only
a copy of the digital file? Since the quality of the digital
copy is identical with the quality ofthe original, the resale
of declared copies of digital files within a declared “2nd hand
service”, in which copies naturally would be sold for a cheaper
price, would result in an inexorable drop of the price for the
originals. Not only would cause this immense financial harm for
film-producers and -authors, but also for online service
providers.

Registration of works and other subject matter – is it a good
idea?

Registration is not often discussed in copyright in the EU as
the existing international treaties in the area prohibit
formalities as a condition for the protection and exercise of
rights. However, this prohibition is not absolute29

For example, it does not affect “domestic” works – i.e. works
originating in the country imposing the formalities asopposed
to works originating in another country.

. Moreover a system of registration does not need to be made
compulsory or constitute a precondition for the protection and
exercise of rights. With a longer term of protection and with
the increased opportunities that digital technology provides
for the use of content (including older works and works that
otherwise would not have been disseminated), the advantages and
disadvantages of a system of registration are increasingly being
considered30

On the basisof Article 3.6 of the Directive 2012/28/EU of the
European Parliament and of the Council of 25 October 2012 on
certain permitted uses of orphan works, a publicly accessible
online database is currently being set up by the Office for
Harmonisation of the Internal Market (OHIM) for the
registration of orphan works.

.

Would the creation of a registration system at EU level help in
the identification and licensing of works and other subject
matter?

 YES

 NO

 NO OPINION

What would be the possible advantages of such a system?

[Open question]

CMOs already provide such a “registration system” for the
identification and licensing of works in various ways. They
already administer lots of information about rightholders,
their works and the usage of works ona national, European and
international level and grant relating licenses (which is
basically true for musical societies, as in fact most of the
audiovisual societies in Europe do not administer “primary
exploitation rights”, as indicated before). So thereis in fact
no need to develop any parallel systems, which would indeed be
counterproductive. Above that, it seems unclear, whether such a
registration system would be voluntary or obligatory, public or
private and if it would be for the identification of
rightholders only or otherwise what rights it would grant. That
means it is unclear whether it should be a simple register which
keeps a record of concluded contracts, or if it is supposed to
grant copyright protection.

What would be the possible disadvantages of such a system?

[Open question]

I am against any system that would run against the mandatory
“formality prohibition” of the Berne Convention. In any way
setting up such a registration system would be extremely
costly, time consuming and would likely never be reliable since
it would constantly have to be kept up-to-date. So it probably
would be much more efficient to link all the individual
databases that already exist and are constantly being developed
(not only but also) within the audiovisual sector. CMOs already
provide such a “registration system” for the identification and
licensing of works in various ways. They already administer lots
of information about rightholders, their works and the usage of
works on a national, European and international level and grant
relating licenses (which is basically true for musical
societies, as in fact most of the audiovisual societies in
Europe do not administer “primary exploitation rights”, as
indicated before). So there is in fact no need to develop any
parallel systems, which would indeed be counterproductive.
Above that, it seems unclear, whether such a registration
system would be voluntary or obligatory, public or private and
if it would be for the identification of rightholders only or
otherwise what rights it would grant. That means it is unclear
whether it should be a simple register which keeps a record of
concluded contracts, or if it is supposed to grant copyright
protection.

What incentives for registration by rightholders could be
envisaged?

[Open question]

Easy to access, free of charge, transparency, easy to adapt,
supplied in a wide range of flexible technical formats.
Incentives must not be connected to copyright privileges as
this would contradict international copyright law.

How to improve the use and interoperability of identifiers

There are many private databases of works and other subject
matter held by producers, collective management organisations,
and institutions such as libraries, which are based to
a greater or lesser extent onthe use of (more or less)
interoperable, internationally agreed ‘identifiers’.
Identifiers can be compared to a reference number embedded in a
work, are specific to the sector in which they have been
developed31

E.g. the International Standard Recording Code (ISRC) is used to
identify recordings, the International Standard Book Number
(ISBN) is used to identify books.

, and identify, variously, the work itself, the owner or the
contributor to a work or other subject matter. There are
notable examples of where industry is undertaking actions to
improve the interoperability of such identifiers and databases.
The Global Repertoire Database32

You will find more information about this initiative on the
following website:http://www.globalrepertoiredatabase.com/.

should, once operational, provide a single source of information
on the ownership and control of musical works worldwide. The
Linked Content Coalition33

You will find more information about this initiative (funded in
part by the European Commission) on the following website:
www.linkedcontentcoalition.org.

was established to develop building blocks for the expression
and management of rights and licensing across all content and
media types. It includes the development of a Rights Reference
Model (RRM) – a comprehensive data model for all types of
rights in all types of content. The UK Copyright Hub34

You will find more information about this initiative on the
following website:http://www.copyrighthub.co.uk/.

is seeking to take such identification systems a step further,
and to create a linked platform, enabling automated licensing
across different sectors.

What should be the role of the EU in promoting the adoption
of identifiers in the content sector, and in promoting the
development and interoperability of rights ownership and
permissions databases?

[Open question]

In the fields of collective management, i.e. also regarding
audiovisual works, lotsof “International Standars” already
exist and are constantly developed. For example the
“International Standard Audiovisual Number” (ISAN) is a
voluntary numbering system and metadata scheme enabling the
identification of any audiovisual work, including films,
shorts, documentaries, television programs and their related
versions. ISAN provides a unique, internationally recognised
and permanent reference number for each piece of audiovisual
content registered. ISAN is being used in production and
distribution systems and to drive broadcast transmission
systems, facilitating interoperability and information exchange
that contributes to improving rights management. ISAN is key to
content tracking and monitoring, and has been integrated in
several watermarking and fingerprinting technologies.
Collective management of rights relies on identification
systems and databases. ISAN is progressively being integrated
into the databases of audiovisual authors’ CMOs containing
information on the works, their authors and other rights
holders. Audiovisual authors’ CMOs have also developed IDA
(International Documentation on Audiovisual Works), a worldwide
audiovisual rights management system and online database that
authors’ CMOs consult to get accurate information on
audiovisual works and rights owners. This global database
manages original productions, versions and adaptations in other
languages and formats. Each work registration contains a minimum
set of information: original titles, foreign titles, subtitles,
production companies, year and country of production, shooting
languages, rights owners, ISAN number, IPI (Interested Party
Information), exploitation purposes and a unique IDA code. The
audiovisual authors’ CMOs use IDA to identify the transmitted
audiovisual production and rights-owners, retrieve and treat
the information before distributing the royalties to the
identified sister organisations. The sister organisation itself
will transfer these royalties to their authors. The unique IDA
code is used between CMOs whenexchanging information on an
audiovisual work. Before IDA, authors’ CMOs sent requests by
e-mail or mail to sister societies, meaning paperwork and
rather long identification processes. IDA facilitates their
identification and the exchange of documentation between CMOs
and accelerates the transfer of payments between CMOs. Such a
database is built for the specific needs of audiovisual
authors’ CMOs but uses existing tools such as IPI and ISAN in
order to avoid the duplication of efforts. It represents a
significant investment for these CMOs which will deliver
benefits in the long term. IDA is a CISAC tool (the
International Confederation of Societies of Authors and
Composers) and is a part of the “CISAC Professional Rules” and
the “Binding Resolutions” foraudiovisual authors’ CMOs, rules
that aim to improve transparency and quality of service for all
CISAC members. The European Union could help in building a
portal giving some public information and visibility to these
tools and how they work together.

Term of protection – is it appropriate?

Works and other subject matter are protected under copyright for
a limited period of time. After the term of protection has
expired, a work falls into the public domain and can be freely
used by anyone (in accordance with the applicable national
rules on moral rights). The Berne Convention35

Berne Convention for the Protection of Literary and Artistic
Works,http://www.wipo.int/treaties/en/ip/berne/.

requires aminimum term of protection of 50 years after the death
of the author. The EU rules extend this term of protection to 70
years after the death of the author (as do many other countries,
e.g. the US).

With regard to performers in the music sector and phonogram
producers, the term provided for in the EU rules also extend 20
years beyond what is mandated in international agreements,
providing for a term of protection of 70 years after the first
publication. Performers and producers in the audio-visual
sector,however, do not benefit from such an extended term of
protection.

Are the current terms of copyright protection still appropriate
in the digital environment?

 YES – Please explain

I definitely believe that the term of protection should not be
changedand especially not be shortened. This would have
negative impacts on the ability of rightholders to exploit
their works during the period of the exclusivity of their
rights. The EU-Directive harmonising the term of protection of
copyright and certain related rights recalled that the Berne
Convention lays down only minimum terms of protection, leaving
Contracting States free to grant longer terms. As certain
Member States had exercised this entitlement, the resulting
differences between national laws were considered as distorting
competition in the internal market, which justified
harmonisation to make terms of protection identical throughout
the Community. The Directive recalls that the minimum term of
protection laid down by the Berne Convention (life of the
author and 50 years after his death) was intended to provide
protection for the author and the first two generations of his
descendants and considered that the average lifespan in the
Community had increased, to the point where this term was no
longer sufficient to cover two generations. Therefore, in order
to establish a high level of protection, which at the same time
meets the requirements of the internal market and the need to
establish a legal environment conducive to the harmonious
development of literary and artistic creation in the Community,
the Directive harmonised the term of protection for copyright at
70 years after the death of the author. Therefore, apart from
harmonisation, the main reason for the extension of the term of
protection from 50to 70 years was the extension of the average
lifespan in Europe. I do not see any reason linked to the
digital environment that would question the duration of terms
of copyright protection. Copyright in no way hinders that a
work is exploited or used forthe creation of another work.
Copyright merely provides the rightholder with an adequate
remuneration for the usage of his/her work. The shortening of
the copyright term would harm not only the film-authors, but
also the film industry. Who would benefit from the shortening
of the copyright term? Truly only those, who exploit copyright
protected content without being willing to pay for the
exploitation of such content. It should not be forgotten in
this context that the protection of intellectual property isa
human right (Art 17/2 of the EU Charta)!

 NO – Please explain if they should be longer or shorter

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO OPINION

Limitations and exceptions in the Single Market

Limitations andexceptions to copyright and related rights enable
the use of works and other protected subject-matter, without
obtaining authorisation from the rightholders, for certain
purposes and to a certain extent (for instance the use for
illustration purposes of anextract from a novel by a teacher in
a literature class). At EU level they are established in a
number of copyright directives, most notably Directive
2001/29/EC36

Plus Directive 96/9/ECon the legal protection of
databases;Directive 2009/24/ECon the legal protection of
computer programs,and Directive 92/100/ECon rental right and
lending right.

.

Exceptions and limitations in the national and EU copyright laws
have to respect international law37

Article 9(2) of the Berne Convention for the Protectionof
Literary and Artistic Works (1971); Article 13 of the TRIPS
Agreement (Trade Related Intellectual Property Rights) 1994;
Article 16(2) of the WIPO Performers and Phonograms Treaty
(1996); Article 9(2) of the WIPO Copyright Treaty (1996).

. In accordance with international obligations, the EU acquis
requires that limitations and exceptions can only be applied in
certain special cases which do not conflict with a normal
exploitation of the work or other subject matter and do not
unreasonably prejudice thelegitimate interest of the
rightholders.

Whereas the catalogue of limitations and exceptions included in
EU law is exhaustive (no other exceptions can be applied to the
rights harmonised at EU level)38

Other than the grandfathering of the exceptions ofminor
importance for analogue uses existing in Member States at the
time of adoption of Directive 2001/29/EC (see, Art. 5(3)(o)).

, these limitations and exceptions are often optional39

With the exception of certain limitations: (i) in the Computer
Programs Directive, (ii) in the Database Directive, (iii)
Article 5(1) in the Directive 2001/29/EC and (iv) the Orphan
Works Directive.

, in the sense that Member States are free to reflect in
national legislation as many or as few of them as they wish.
Moreover,the formulation of certain of the limitations and
exceptions is general enough to give significant flexibility to
the Member States as to how, and to what extent, to implement
them (if they decide to do so). Finally, it is worth noting
that not all of thelimitations and exceptions included in the
EU legal framework for copyright are of equivalent significance
in policy terms and in terms of their potential effect on the
functioning of the Single Market.

In addition, in the same manner that the definitionof the rights
is territorial (i.e. has an effect only within the territory of
the Member State), the definition of the limitations and
exceptions to the rights is territorial too (so an act that is
covered by an exception in a Member State "A" may still require
the authorisation of the rightholder once we move to the Member
State "B")40

Only the exception established in the recent Orphan Works
Directive (a mandatory exception to copyright and related
rights in the case where the rightholders are not knownor
cannot be located) has been given a cross-border effect, which
means that, for instance, once a literary work – for instance a
novel – is considered an orphan work in a Member State, that
same novel shall be considered an orphan work in all Member
States and can be used and accessed in all Member States.

.

The cross-border effect of limitations and exceptions also
raises the question of fair compensation of rightholders. In
some instances, Member States are obliged to compensate
rightholders for the harminflicted on them by a limitation or
exception to their rights. In other instances Member States are
not obliged, but may decide, to provide for such compensation.
If a limitation or exception triggering a mechanism of fair
compensation were to be given cross-border effect (e.g. the
books are used for illustration in an online course given by an
university in a Member State "A" and the students are in a
Member State "B") then there would also be a need to clarify
which national law should determine the level of that
compensation and who should pay it.

Finally, the question of flexibility and adaptability is being
raised: what is the best mechanism to ensure that the EU and
Member States’ regulatory frameworks adapt when necessary
(either to clarify that certain uses are covered by an
exception or to confirm that for certain uses the authorisation
of rightholders is required)? The main question here is whether
a greater degree of flexibility can be introduced in the EU and
Member States regulatory framework while ensuring the required
legal certainty, including for the functioning of the Single
Market, and respecting the EU's international obligations.

Are there problems arising from the fact that most limitations
and exceptions provided in the EU copyright directives are
optional for the Member States?

 YES – Please explain by referring to specific cases

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO – Please explain

The current EU law and international treaties providesufficient
flexibility for copyright and exceptions and limitations. There
is no practical need for any new exceptions or to make the
existing exceptions under the Info-Soc-Directive mandatory, as
there is no evidenced need for such legislative changes. CMOs
provide various solutions through dedicated licensing for
teaching, educational institutions, research etc. There is no
problem with the fact that most exceptions provided in EU
copyright directives are optional for the Member States. The
list of exceptions of the 2001/29/EC Directive is very long and
encompasses all possible exceptions in the EU, but not for
direct implementation by all Member States. Making this list
mandatory would severely undermine the protection of authors’
rights.

 NO OPINION

Should some/all of the exceptions be made mandatory and, if so,
is there a need for a higher level of harmonisation of such
exceptions?

 YES – Please explain by referring to specific cases

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO – Please explain

There is no reason nor is there a justification for such a step.
The principle of subsidiarity has to be respected. Moreover, the
current legal frame is sufficient and provides the flexibility
required in the current harmonization process.

 NO OPINION

Should any new limitations and exceptions be added to or removed
from the existing catalogue?Please explain by referring to
specific cases.

[Open question]

There is no need to add or remove limitations and
exceptionsto/from the existing catalogue. The existing
catalogue reflects a good compromise at EU level.

Independently from the questions above, is there a need to
provide for a greater degree of flexibility in the EU
regulatory framework for limitations andexceptions?

 YES – Please explain why

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO – Please explain why

I am definitely against the introduction of a US-type “fair use”
exception in Europe, since it is not adapted to EU-law and
provides no legal certainty as issues can only be resolved in
front of the courts. A higher number of disputes and court
cases would be fundamentally in contradiction with the Single
Market objectives.

 NO OPINION

If yes, what would be thebest approach to provide for
flexibility? (e.g. interpretation by national courts and the
ECJ, periodic revisions of the directives, interpretations by
the Commission, built-in flexibility, e.g. in the form of a
fair-use or fair dealing provision / open norm, etc.)? Please
explain indicating what would be the relative advantages and
disadvantages of such an approach as well as its possible
effects on the functioning of the Internal Market.

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Does the territoriality of limitations and exceptions, in your
experience, constitute a problem?

 YES – Please explain why and specify which exceptions you
are referring to

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO – Please explain why and specify which exceptions you are
referring to

The territoriality of exceptions and limitations matches the
“territoriality principle” of copyright and respects
different legal and cultural specificities inthe member states.
I think, that the territoriality of limitations and exceptions
do not constitute any problems.

 NO OPINION

In the event that limitations and exceptions established at
national level were to have cross-border effect, how should
thequestion of “fair compensation” be addressed, when such
compensation is part of the exception? (e.g. who pays whom,
where?)

[Open question]

It seems reasonable that fair compensation is due in the place
where the end user benefits from the exception, asis the case,
for example, with the private copying exception (levies are due
in the country in which the “harm” to the rightholder arises,
i.e. in the country in which the end user who bought the
product resides according to the “Opus ruling” of the CJUE).In
addition, it is crucial that remuneration is provided to the
rightholders in the country where they reside, which is
possible because of reciprocal agreements between collective
management organizations.

Access to content in libraries and archives

Directive 2001/29/EC enables Member States to reflect in their
national law a range of limitations and exceptions for the
benefit of publicly accessible libraries, educational
establishments and museums, as well as archives. If
implemented, these exceptions allow acts of preservation and
archiving41

Article 5(2)c of Directive 2001/29.

and enable on-site consultation of the works and other subject
matter in the collections of such institutions42

Article 5(3)n of Directive 2001/29.

. The public lending (underan exception or limitation) by these
establishments of physical copies of works and other subject
matter is governed by the Rental and Lending Directive43

Article 5 of Directive 2006/115/EC.

.

Questions arise as to whether the current framework continuesto
achieve the objectives envisaged or whether it needs to be
clarified or updated to cover use in digital networks. At the
same time, questions arise as to the effect of such a possible
expansion on the normal exploitation of works and other subject
matter and as to the prejudice this may cause to rightholders.
The role of licensing and possible framework agreements between
different stakeholders also needs to be considered here.

Preservation and archiving

The preservation of the copies of works or othersubject-matter
held in the collections of cultural establishments (e.g. books,
records, or films) – the restoration or replacement of works,
the copying of fragile works - may involve the creation of
another copy/ies of these works or other subject matter.Most
Member States provide for an exception in their national laws
allowing for the making of such preservation copies. The scope
of the exception differs from Member State to Member State (as
regards the type of beneficiary establishments, the types of
works/subject-matter covered by the exception, the mode of
copying and the number of reproductions that a beneficiary
establishment may make). Also, the current legal status of new
types of preservation activities (e.g. harvesting and archiving
publicly available web content) is often uncertain.

(a)[In particular if you are an institutional user:]Have you
experienced specific problems when trying to use an exception
to preserve and archive specific works or other subject matter
in your collection?

(b)[Inparticular if you are a right holder:]Have you experienced
problems with the use by libraries, educational establishments,
museum or archives of the preservation exception?

 YES – Please explain, by Member State, sector, and the type
of use in question.

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO

 NO OPINION

If there are problems, how would they best be solved?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

If yourview is that a legislative solution is needed, what would
be its main elements? Which activities of the beneficiary
institutions should be covered and under which conditions?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

If your view is that a different solution is needed, what would
it be?

[Open question]

As far as “film heritage institutions” are concerned, the 2001
Copyright Directive provides for carefully crafted exceptions
addressing the needs ofpublicly accessible libraries,
educational establishments, museums and archives. These
exceptions allow film archive institutions to fulfil their
public interest missions. Above these exceptions, various
European CMOs have offered their help to film and audiovisual
archives institutions on many occasions to address their needs
in relation to the use of the cinematographic and audiovisual
works contained in their collections and their related authors’
rights. This has resulted in specific arrangements in a number
of countries: collective agreements in France, mandatory
collective administration of broadcasters’ archives in
Switzerland, extended collective agreements in the Netherlands
and in the Nordic countries, etc. The Commission should work as
a facilitator to encourage film archive institutions and their
European representatives to explore the possibility of further
agreements with audiovisual authors’ organisations whether at
national or EU level.

Off-premises access to library collections

Directive 2001/29/EC provides an exception for the consultation
of works and other subject-matter (consulting an e-book,
watching a documentary) via dedicated terminals on the premises
of such establishments for the purpose of research and private
study. The online consultation of works and other
subject-matter remotely (i.e. when the library user is not on
the premises of the library) requires authorisation and is
generally addressed in agreements between
universities/libraries and publishers. Some argue that the law
rather than agreements should provide for the possibility to,
and the conditions for, granting online access to collections.

(a)[In particular if you are an institutional user:]Have you
experienced specific problems when trying to negotiate
agreements with rights holders that enable you to provide
remote access, including across borders, to your collections
(or parts thereof) for purposes of research and private study?

(b)[In particular if you are an end user/consumer:]Have you
experienced specificproblems when trying to consult, including
across borders, works and other subject-matter held in the
collections of institutions such as universities and national
libraries when you are not on the premises of the institutions
in question?

(c)[In particular if you are aright holder:]Have you negotiated
agreements with institutional users that enable those
institutions to provide remote access, including across
borders, to the works or other subject-matter in their
collections, for purposes of researchand private study?

[Open question]

32 c - No

If there are problems, how would they best be solved?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

If your view is that a legislative solution is needed, whatwould
be its main elements? Which activities of the beneficiary
institutions should be covered and under which conditions?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

If your view is that a differentsolution is needed, what would
it be?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

E – lending

Traditionally, public libraries have loaned physical copies of
works (i.e. books, sometimes also CDs and DVDs) totheir users.
Recent technological developments have made it technically
possible for libraries to provide users with temporary access
to digital content, such as e-books, music or films via
networks. Under the current legal framework, libraries need to
obtain the authorisation of the rights holders to organise such
e-lending activities. In various Member States, publishers and
libraries are currently experimenting with different business
models for the making available of works online, including
direct supply of e-books to libraries by publishers or bundling
by aggregators.

(a)[In particular if you are alibrary:]Have you experienced
specific problems when trying to negotiate agreements to enable
the electronic lending (e-lending), including across borders, of
books or other materials held in your collection?

(b)[In particular if you are an end user/consumer:]Have you
experienced specific problems when trying to borrow books or
other materials electronically (e-lending), including across
borders, frominstitutions such as public libraries?

(c)[In particular if you are aright holder:]Have you negotiated
agreements with libraries to enable them to lend books or other
materials electronically, including across borders?

 YES – Please explain with specific examples

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO

 NO OPINION

If there are problems, how would they best be solved?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

The following two questions are relevant both to this point (n°
3) and the previous one (n° 2).

[In particular if you are an institutional user:]What
differences do you see in the management of physical and online
collections, including providingaccess to your subscribers? What
problems have you encountered?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

[In particular if you are a right holder:]What difference do you
see between libraries’traditional activities such as on-premises
consultation or public lending and activities such as
off-premises (online, at a distance) consultation and
e-lending? What problems have you encountered?

[Open question]

Because of the nature of the internet, thedifference between
libraries’ traditional activities and online consultation and
e-lending is huge. The conditions for these new activities have
to be discussed with authors’ representative organisations like
CMOs through licencing processes which will allow libraries to
develop these new activities and for authors to be remunerated.

Mass digitisation

The term “mass digitisation” is normally used to refer to
efforts by institutions such as libraries and archives to
digitise (e.g. scan) the entire contentor part of their
collections with an objective to preserve these collections
and, normally, to make them available to the public. Examples
are efforts by libraries to digitise novels form the early part
of the 20thcentury or whole collections of picturesof historical
value. This matter has been partly addressed at the EU level by
the 2011 Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) on key principles on
the digitisation and making available of out of commerce works
(i.e. works which are no longer found in the normal channels of
commerce), which is aiming to facilitate mass digitisation
efforts (for books and learned journals) on the basis of
licence agreements between libraries and similar cultural
institutions on the one hand and the collecting societies
representing authors and publishers on the other44

You will find more information about his MoU on the following
website:http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/copyright/out-of-commerce/index_en.htm.

. Provided the required funding is ensured (digitisation
projects are extremely expensive), the result of this MoU
should be that books that are currently to be found only in the
archives of, for instance, libraries will be digitised and made
available online to everyone. The MoU is based on voluntary
licences (granted by Collective Management Organisations on the
basis of the mandates they receive from authors and publishers).
Some Member States may need to enact legislation to ensure the
largest possible effect of such licences (e.g. by establishing
in legislation a presumption of representation of a collecting
society or the recognition of an “extended effect” to the
licences granted)45

France and Germany have already adopted legislation to back the
effects of the MoU.The French act (LOI n° 2012-287 du 1er mars
2012 relative à l'exploitation numérique des livres
indisponibles du xxe siècle) foresees collective management,
unless the author or publisher in question opposes such
management.The German act (Gesetz zur Nutzung verwaister und
vergriffener Werke und einer weiteren Änderung des
Urheberrechtsgesetzes vom 1.Oktober 2013) contains a legal
presumption of representation by a collecting society in
relation to works whose rightholders are not members of the
collecting society.

.

[In particular if you are an institutional user,engaging or
wanting to engage in mass digitisation projects, a right
holder, a collective management organisation:]Would it be
necessary in your country to enact legislation to ensure that
the results of the 2011 MoU (i.e. the agreements concluded
between libraries and collecting societies) have a cross-border
effect so that out of commerce works can be accessed across the
EU?

 YES – Please explain why and how it could best be achieved

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO OPINION

Would it be necessary to developmechanisms, beyond those already
agreed for other types of content (e.g. for audio- or
audio-visual collections, broadcasters’ archives)?

 YES – Please explain

I am fully committed to pursue the project that was started in
the “Licences for Europe” (Audiovisual and Film Heritage
Institutions) process and to find a way to undertake mass
digitization and clearance for online uses of the high volume
of older works in the archives of film heritage institutions
and public services broadcasters. Audiovisual authors’ CMOs
have a central role to play in helping these institutions
preserve and offer to the public the cultural heritage of great
works. Thanks to the “Statement of Principles and Procedures for
heritage films online” concluded between ACE, FERA, FIAPFand the
SAA during “Licences for Europe”, film heritage institutions and
rightholders’ representatives now have a clear roadmap to
discuss and agree terms for digitizing, restoring and making
available European film heritage. It will enable film heritage
institutions to free up European films stored in their archives
while guaranteeing rightholders an appropriate share of the
rewards. As far as broadcasters’ archives are concerned, no
broad agreement including all stakeholders could be reached
during the “Licences for Europe” timeframe. EBU and the SAA
together developed some recommendations highlighting that
collective licensing solutions are particularly suitable for
the large scale clearance of rights. This would help make a
very significant amount of works available, particularly for
research and educational purposes. Further discussions are
needed to develop a MoU or any other type of general agreement
that would propose a suitable solution for mass digitization
and rights clearance of broadcasters’ archives based on
collective management.

 NO – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO OPINION

Teaching

Directive 2001/29/EC46

Article 5(3)a of Directive 2001/29.

enables Member States to implement intheir national legislation
limitations and exceptions for the purpose of illustration for
non-commercial teaching. Such exceptions would typically allow
a teacher to use parts of or full works to illustrate his
course, e.g. by distributing copies of fragments of a book or
of newspaper articles in the classroom or by showing protected
content on a smart board without having to obtain authorisation
from the right holders. The open formulation of this (optional)
provision allows for rather different implementation at Member
States level. The implementation of the exception differs from
Member State to Member State, with several Member States
providing instead a framework for the licensing of content for
certain educational uses. Some argue that the law should
provide for better possibilities for distance learning and
study at home.

(a)[In particular if you are an end user/consumer or an
institutional user:]Have you experienced specific problems when
trying to use works or other subject-matter for illustrationfor
teaching, including across borders?

(b)[In particular if you are a right holder:]Have you
experienced specific problems resulting from the way in which
works or other subject-matter are used for illustration for
teaching, including across borders?

 YES – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO

 NO OPINION

If there are problems, how would they best be solved?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

What mechanisms exist in the market place to facilitate the use
of content for illustration for teaching purposes? How
successful are they?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

If your view is that a legislative solution is needed, what
would be its main elements? Which activities of the beneficiary
institutions should be covered and under what conditions?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

If your view is that a different solution is needed, what would
it be?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Research

Directive 2001/29/EC47

Article 5(3)a of Directive 2001/29.

enables Member States to choose whether to implement in their
national laws a limitation for the purpose of non-commercial
scientific research. The open formulation of this (optional)
provision allows for rather different implementations at Member
States level.

(a)[In particular if you are an end user/consumer or an
institutional user:]Have you experienced specific problems when
trying to use works or other subject matter in the context of
research projects/activities,including across borders?

(b)[In particular if you are a right holder:]Have you
experienced specific problems resulting from the way in which
works or other subject-matter are used in the context of
research projects/activities, including acrossborders?

 YES – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO

 NO OPINION

If there are problems, how would they best be solved?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

What mechanisms exist in the Member States to facilitate the use
of content for research purposes? How successful are they?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Disabilities

Directive 2001/29/EC48

Article 5 (3)b of Directive 2001/29.

provides for an exception/limitation for the benefit of people
with a disability. The open formulation of this (optional)
provision allows for rather different implementations atMember
States level. At EU and international level projects have been
launched to increase the accessibility of works and other
subject-matter for persons with disabilities (notably by
increasing the number of works published in special formats and
facilitating their distribution across the European Union)49

The European Trusted Intermediaries Network (ETIN) resulting
from a Memorandum of Understanding between representatives of
the right-holder community (publishers, authors, collecting
societies) and interested parties such as associations for
blind and dyslexic persons
(http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/copyright/initiatives/access/index_en.htm)
and the Trusted Intermediary Global Accessible Resources (TIGAR)
project in WIPO (http://www.visionip.org/portal/en/).

.

The Marrakesh Treaty50

Marrakesh Treaty to Facilitate Access to Published Works by
Visually Impaired Persons and Persons with Print Disabilities,
Marrakesh, June 17 to 28 2013.

has been adopted to facilitate access to published works for
persons who are blind, visually impaired, or otherwise print
disabled. The Treaty creates a mandatory exceptionto copyright
that allows organisations for the blind to produce, distribute
and make available accessible format copies to visually
impaired persons without the authorisation of the rightholders.
The EU and its Member States have started work to sign andratify
the Treaty. This may require the adoption of certain provisions
at EU level (e.g. to ensure the possibility to exchange
accessible format copies across borders).

(a)[In particular if you are a person with a disability or an
organisation representing persons with disabilities:]Have you
experienced problems with accessibility to content, including
across borders, arising from Member States’ implementation of
this exception?

(b)[In particular if you are an organisation providing services
for personswith disabilities:]Have you experienced problems
when distributing/communicating works published in special
formats across the EU?

(c)[In particular if you are a right holder:]Have you
experienced specific problems resulting from the application of
limitations or exceptions allowing for the
distribution/communication of works published in special
formats, including across borders?

 YES – Please explain by giving examples

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO

 NO OPINION

If there are problems, what could be done to improve
accessibility?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

What mechanisms exist in the market place to facilitate
accessibility tocontent? How successful are they?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Text and data mining

Text and data mining/content mining/data analytics51

For the purpose of the present document, the term “textand data
mining” will be used.

are different terms used to describe increasingly important
techniques used in particular by researchers for the
exploration of vast amounts of existing texts and data (e.g.,
journals, web sites, databases etc.). Through the use of
software or other automated processes, an analysis is made of
relevant texts and data in order to obtain new insights,
patterns and trends.

The texts and data used for mining are either freely accessible
on the internet or accessible through subscriptions to e.g.
journals and periodicals that give access to the databases of
publishers. A copy is made of the relevant texts and data (e.g.
on browser cache memories or in computers RAM memories or onto
the hard disk of a computer), prior to the actual analysis.
Normally, it is considered that to mine protected works or
other subject matter, it is necessary to obtain authorisation
from the right holders for the making of such copies unless
such authorisation can be implied (e.g. content accessible to
general public without restrictions on the internet, open
access).

Some argue that the copies required for text and data mining are
covered by the exception for temporary copies in Article 5.1 of
Directive 2001/29/EC. Others consider that text and data mining
activities should not even be seen as covered by copyright. None
of this is clear, in particular since text and data mining does
not consist only of a single method, but can be undertaken in
several different ways. Important questions also remain as
towhether the main problems arising in relation to this issue
go beyond copyright (i.e. beyond the necessity or not to obtain
the authorisation to use content) and relate rather to the need
to obtain “access” to content (i.e. being able to use e.g.
commercial databases).

A specific Working Group was set up on this issue in the
framework of the "Licences for Europe" stakeholder dialogue. No
consensus was reached among participating stakeholders on either
the problems to be addressed or the results. At the same time,
practical solutions to facilitate text and data mining of
subscription-based scientific content were presented by
publishers as an outcome of “Licences for Europe”52

See the document “Licences for Europe – ten pledges to bring
more content
online”:http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/copyright/docs/licences-for-europe/131113_ten-pledges_en.pdf.

. In the context of these discussions, other stakeholders argued
that no additional licences should be required to mine material
to which access has been provided through a subscription
agreement and considered that a specific exception for text and
data mining should be introduced, possibly onthe basis of
a distinction between commercial and non-commercial.

(a)[In particular if you are an end user/consumer or an
institutional user:]Have you experienced obstacles, linked to
copyright, when trying to use text or data mining methods,
includingacross borders?

(b)[In particular if you are a service provider:]Have you
experienced obstacles, linked to copyright, when providing
services based on text or data mining methods, including across
borders?

(c)[In particular if you are a right holder:]Have you
experienced specific problems resulting from the use of text
and data mining in relation to copyright protected content,
including across borders?

 YES – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO OPINION

If there are problems, how would they best be solved?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

If your view is that a legislative solution is needed, what
would be its main elements? Which activities should be covered
and under what conditions?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

If your view is that a different solution is needed, what would
it be?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Are there other issues, unrelated to copyright, thatconstitute
barriers to the use of text or data mining methods?

[Open question] ……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

User-generated content

Technological and service developments mean that citizens can
copy, use anddistribute content at little to no financial cost.
As a consequence, new types of online activities are developing
rapidly, including the making of so-called “user-generated
content”. While users can create totally original content, they
can also take oneor several pre-existing works, change something
in the work(s), and upload the result on the Internet e.g. to
platforms and blogs53

A typical example could be the “kitchen” or “wedding” video
(adding one's own video to a pre-existing sound recording),
oradding one's own text to a pre-existing photograph. Other
examples are “mash-ups” (blending two sound recordings), and
reproducing parts of journalistic work (report, review etc.) in
a blog.

. User-generated content (UGC) can thus cover the modification
ofpre-existing works even if the newly-generated/"uploaded"
work does not necessarily require a creative effort and results
from merely adding, subtracting or associating some pre-existing
content with other pre-existing content. This kind of activity
is not“new” as such. However, the development of social
networking and social media sites that enable users to share
content widely has vastly changed the scale of such activities
and increased the potential economic impact for those holding
rights in the pre-existing works. Re-use is no longer the
preserve of a technically and artistically adept elite. With
the possibilities offered by the new technologies, re-use is
open to all, at no cost. This in turn raises questions with
regard to fundamental rights such the freedom of expression and
the right to property.

A specific Working Group was set up on this issue in the
framework of the "Licences for Europe" stakeholder dialogue. No
consensus was reached among participating stakeholders on either
the problems to beaddressed or the results or even the
definition of UGC. Nevertheless, a wide range of views were
presented as to the best way to respond to this phenomenon. One
view was to say that a new exception is needed to cover UGC, in
particular non-commercial activities by individuals such as
combining existing musical works with videos, sequences of
photos, etc. Another view was that no legislative change is
needed: UGC is flourishing, and licensing schemes are
increasingly available (licence schemes concluded between
rightholders and platforms as well as micro-licences concluded
between rightholders and the users generating the content. In
any event, practical solutions to ease user-generated content
and facilitate micro-licensing for small users were pledged by
rightholders across different sectors as a result of the
“Licences for Europe” discussions54

See the document “Licences for Europe – ten pledges to bring
more content
online”:http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/copyright/docs/licences-for-europe/131113_ten-pledges_en.pdf.

.

(a)[In particular if you are an end user/consumer:]Have you
experienced problems when trying to use pre-existing worksor
other subject matter to disseminate new content on the
Internet, including across borders?

(b)[In particular if you are a service provider:]Have you
experienced problems when users publish/disseminate new content
based on the pre-existing works or other subject-matter through
your service, including across borders?

(c)[In particular if you are a right holder:]Have you
experienced problems resulting from the way the users are using
pre-existing works or other subject-matter to disseminate new
contenton the Internet, including across borders?

 YES – Please explain by giving examples

Many creators, also those who grant licenses to third parties on
the basis of creative commons licenses, find it unacceptable
that persons relying on their content do notrespect their moral
rights, in particular the right of attribution as well the
adaptation right. In practice, creators who devote their
professional life to the creation of works, do not consider it
a compliment if their finished work is adapted, amendedor
changed by others. At the same time, persons exploiting and
disrespecting rights of others in this manner frequently have
the intention of exploiting such creations of others in order
to monetize them, eg on Youtube, for their own benefit. Every
creatortherefore should have the right to effectively and
efficiently be able to enforce how third parties use his or her
work. Whether the third party has commercial interests should
not be decisive in order to be in control. I believe that I as
rightholder shall be the one entitled to decide about who
exploits my works and in what manner the exploitation of my
works occurs. Mainly, I do not want my works being exploited
together with content or in a context I cannot identify myself
with. E.g. if my film gets synched with a song by a
right-winged-extremist group, I as rightholder should have the
right to prohibit such a usage. Besides that I believe it is
unfair, if someone else makes money with my works and I have no
financial benefit from that. Online Servicesthat financially
benefit from users, who produce and upload videos containing
works that do not belong to them in large quantities and who do
that for free, should be obliged to remunerate the producers and
film authors of the exploited works!

 NO

 NOOPINION

(a)[In particular if you are an end user/consumer or a right
holder:]Have you experienced problems when trying to ensure
that the work you have created (on the basis of pre-existing
works) is properly identified for online use? Are proprietary
systems sufficient in this context?

(b)[In particular if you are a service provider:]Do you provide
possibilities for users that are publishing/disseminating the
works they have created (on the basis of pre-existing works)
through your service to properlyidentify these works for online
use?

 YES – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO OPINION

(a)[In particular if you are an end user/consumer or a right
holder):]Have you experienced problems when trying to be
remunerated for the use of the work you have created (on the
basis of pre-existing works)?

(b)[In particular if you are a service provider:]Do you provide
remuneration schemes for users publishing/disseminating the
works they have created (on the basis of pre-existing works)
through your service?

 YES – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO OPINION

If there are problems, how would they best be solved?

[Open question]

The use of pre-existing protected works to create user-generated
content needs the authorisation of the authors or their
representatives (in particular, to guarantee respect for moral
rights), unless an exception can be invoked.

If your view is that a legislative solution is needed, whatwould
be its main elements? Which activities should be covered and
under what conditions?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

If your view is that a different solution is needed, what would
it be?

[Open question]

As traditional media are usually obliged to produce European
content and as broadcasters are obliged to broadcast such
content, I consider it to be discriminating that new media are
not obliged to contribute to the financing of such contentat
all.

Private copying and reprography

Directive 2001/29/EC enables Member States to implement in their
national legislation exceptions or limitations to the
reproduction right for copies made for private use and
photocopying55

Article 5. 2)(a) and(b) of Directive 2001/29.

. Levies are charges imposed at national level on goods
typically used for such purposes (blank media, recording
equipment, photocopying machines, mobile listening devices such
as mp3/mp4 players, computers, etc.) with a view to compensating
rightholders for the harm they suffer when copies are made
without their authorisation by certain categories of persons
(i.e. natural persons making copies for their private use) or
through use of certain technique (i.e. reprography). In that
context, levies are important for rightholders.

With the constant developments in digital technology, the
question arises as to whether the copying of files by
consumers/end-users who have purchased content online - e.g.
when a person has bought an MP3 fileand goes on to store
multiple copies of that file (in her computer, her tablet and
her mobile phone) - also triggers, or should trigger, the
application of private copying levies. It is argued that, in
some cases, these levies may indeed be claimed by rightholders
whether or not the licence fee paid by the service provider
already covers copies made by the end user. This approach could
potentially lead to instances of double payments whereby levies
could be claimed on top of service providers’ licence fees56

Communication "Unleashing the Potential of Cloud Computing in
Europe", COM(2012) 529 final.

57

These issues were addressed in the recommendations of Mr António
Vitorino resulting from the mediation on private copying and
reprography levies. You can consult these recommendations on
the following
website:http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/copyright/docs/levy_reform/130131_levies-vitorino-recommendations_en.pdf.

.

There is also an on-going discussion as to the application or
not of levies to certain types of cloud-based services such as
personal lockers or personal video recorders.

In your view, is there a need to clarify at the EUlevel the
scope and application of the private copying and reprography
exceptions58

Art. 5.2(a) and 5.2(b) of Directive 2001/29/EC.

in the digital environment?

 YES – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO – Please explain

The CJEU has given necessary interpretation and guidelines to
clarify the application of private copying exception and since
the interpretation of other substantive issues are currently
pendingwith the Court, there is no need to deal further with
the scope and application of the system at EU level.
Rightholders have provided all the necessary practical and
operational solutions to implement those decisions for a
smoother and more streamlined functioning of the Internal
Market. Currently the only missing element is the willingness
of the manufacturers and distributors of recording devices
(almost all of which are non-EU companies) to comply with EU
law.

 NO OPINION

Should digital copies made byend users for private purposes in
the context of a service that has been licensed by
rightholders, and where the harm to the rightholder is minimal,
be subject to private copying levies?59

This issue was also addressed in the recommendations of Mr
Antonio Vitorino resulting from the mediation on private
copying and reprography levies

 YES – Please explain

“Licensing” and application of “private copying levies”
co-exist and they are not mutually exclusive. This point of
view has already been clarified bythe CJEU in its “VG Wort vs.
Kyocera” ruling. One of Mr. Vitorino’s recommendations
(“licensed copies do not cause harm”) suggests that all
subsequent copies made of a work following purchase from
digital services can be covered by licenses granted by
rightholders to these services. Mr. Vitorino therefore proposed
to eliminate levies for “new business models in the digital
environment”. This is based on a gross misconception of both
the private copying system and the multitude of new digital
services whichprovide access to protected works. Private copies
cannot be licensed since they are covered by a statutory
exception to copyright under the 2001/29 Copyright Directive.
Therefore “licensing” and “fair compensation for private
copying” can only be separateissues. Moreover, if the private
copying exception was questioned and private copies inserted
into licences, the ones that would suffer most from such a
change would be consumers and authors, the consumers losing
their freedom to copy and the authors theirfair compensation.
In practice, the authorisation, licence fee and commercial
terms are negotiated by the holders of exclusive rights with
each digital service during the licensing process, whereas fair
compensation is collected through the levy system and
distributed to rightholders by CMOs. Mr. Vitorino’s proposal
derives from the flawed idea that digital services would allow
rightholders to be compensated directly. In practice, only few
rightholders or categories of rightholders grant licences to
digital services (the producers or further intermediaries).
Other rightholders, such as audiovisual authors who transferred
their exclusive rights to the producer sometimes for a lump-sum
payment, do not have any direct relation with digital services
and therefore, no possibility to be paid directly. In this
field, a huge advantage of the private copying system is that
it corrects inequalities between rightholders and guarantees
that each category of rightholders benefits from a fair share
of the value.

 NO – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO OPINION

How would changes in levies with respect to the application to
online services (e.g. services based on cloud computing
allowing, for instance, usersto have copies on different
devices) impact the development and functioning of new business
models on the one hand and rightholders’ revenue on the other?

[Open question]

I believe that the application of levies to certain online
services is justified anddoes not think that it would hinder
the development and functioning of new business models. One of
the main reasons is that, just like the prices of products
across Europe do not vary in proportion to the levy rates, the
prices of online services/new business models are most probably
also unaffected by the levy rates. More copying for private use
takes place now than ever before. The devices and media which
enable or host private copies of protected works have
increased, with storage capacities which havegrown
exponentially. Consumers transfer songs and videos from
computers to hard drives to phones to tablets to online lockers
and back again in order to save and access their personal
libraries whenever and wherever they want. All of these
processes are undeniably acts of private copying. In addition,
in line with the principle of technical neutrality, copies made
via “cloud services” (and other future digital services which do
not yet exist) many have the same purpose (private use) as the
copies made by private individuals on their phones, tablets,
etc. so should be included in the private copying system.
Applying private copying to certain cloud-based services means
that copies made on those specific cloud-based services would
be taken into account by usage studies which assess the harm
caused.

Would you see an added value in making levies visible on the
invoices for products subject to levies?60

This issue was also addressed in the recommendations of Mr
Antonio Vitorino resulting from the mediation onprivate copying
and reprography levies.

 YES – Please explain

I agree with the objective, but does not believe that this
technical point requires a legislative change at EU level
within the Info-Soc Directive. This is certainly not a big
problem in termsof cross-border application of levies. In fact,
it is already applied in some Member States and its application
can easily be extended to all Member States with the agreement
of all stakeholders involved. Past and recent consultation
processes on private copying levies have shown that
stakeholders agree that levies should be clearly visible on all
bills and contracts in the products’ sales chain (this is for
example already the case in Belgium thanks to a new Belgian law
applicable since 1st of December 2013) and on consumers’
invoices and till receipts. In addition, consumers should be
informed of the amount and destination of the levies and more
generally the reason for this mechanism which compensates the
freedom to copy they have thanks to the private copying
exception. This would help consumers understand how important
the levy system is for the EU’s culture and rightholders and
that they are part of and benefit from this virtuous system.
Anyway and for the sake of transparency, consumers should be
informed how much of the product/services price is due to
copyright levies.

 NO – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO OPINION

Diverging national systems levy different products and apply
differenttariffs. This results in obstacles to the free
circulation of goods and services in the Single Market. At the
same time, many Member States continue to allow the
indiscriminate application of private copying levies to all
transactions irrespective of the person to whom the product
subject to a levy is sold (e.g. private person or business). In
that context, not all Member States have ex ante exemption
and/or ex post reimbursement schemes which could remedy these
situations and reduce the number of undue payments61

This issue was also addressed in the recommendations of Mr
Antonio Vitorino resulting from the mediation on private
copying and reprography levies.

.

Have you experienced a situation where a cross-border
transaction resulted in undue levy payments, or duplicate
payments of the same levy, or other obstacles to the free
movement of goods or services?

 YES – Please specify the type of transaction and indicate
the percentage of the undue payments. Please also indicate how
a priori exemption and/orex post reimbursement schemes could
help to remedy the situation.

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO – Please explain

The CJEU has already clarified all these issues in its recent
judgments. As long as the rulings of the Court are followed,
there is no need for any further legislative “clarification” at
EU level. Following the “Opus ruling” by the CJEU the rule would
be that the levy is due in the Member State in which the final
user who purchased the product resides since that is where the
“harm” to the rightholder would arise. In any case, even if
undue levy payments occasionally did occur, “ex-ante
exemptions” and “ex-post-reimbursement systems” should be in
place to ensure that such equipment does not bear levies.

 NO OPINION

What percentage of products subject to a levy is sold to persons
other than natural persons for purposes clearly unrelated to
private copying? Do any of those transactions result in undue
payments? Please explain in detail the exampleyou provide (type
of products, type of transaction, stakeholders, etc.).

[Open question]

I think that devices and blank media can serve other purposes
than for the private copying of protected works. This should be
taken into account when determining tariffs applicable to
devices used to make private copies. In addition, there are
cases where certain devices and media will clearly not be used
for the purpose of private copying (e.g. “professional uses”).
In this context, ex-ante-exemptions and ex-post- reimbursement
systems should be in place to ensure that the equipment
concerned does not bear levies. However, exempting any business
from private copying levies would be excessive, since equipment
bought by companies can also generate private copies (e.g.
business handys that are also used to store music for private
use). It is important to point out that the determining factor
should in any way be the nature of the use, not the quality of
the purchaser. As recommended by the CJEU in the
“Padawan”ruling (C-467/08), professional uses should be
excluded from payment of the levy, but not necessarily all
purchases of professional users. Devices such as tablets or
smartphones, despite being the property of a company, may well
in fact be used by employees to copy protected works for
private use. Recommending that private copying levies should
apply exclusively to purchases by natural persons as private
users would artificially reduce the scope of the private
copying system. Exemption and refund systems for professional
uses should be designed at national level in consideration of
the specificities of the Member States concerned. The
“Austro-Mechana” CJEU ruling (C-521/11) confirmed that
reimbursement schemes for the levies paid on devices that are
not ultimately usedfor private purposes comply with EU law, as
long as they are effectively applied and do not constitute an
excessive burden for those who are entitled to reimbursement.

Where such undue payments arise, what percentage of trade do
they affect? To whatextent could a priori exemptions and/or ex
post reimbursement schemes existing in some Member States help
to remedy the situation?

[Open question]

see above

If you have identified specific problems with the current
functioning of the levy system, howwould these problems best be
solved?

[Open question]

firstly the rightholders’ proposal to introduce a single
declaration point would facilitate declaration and payment
procedures by manufacturers/importers. The proposal to create a
single European declaration was put forward by European
rightholders during the 2008- 2009 dialogue, and agreed with
the ICT industry. It aims to facilitate the implementation of
the “Opus” ruling of the CJEU (C- 462/09). Via the “European
Central Point” mechanism, distance sellers could submit
declarations of sales of goods eligible to private copying
levies at a single EU entry point, while the compensation would
be invoiced and paid in the country of destination. Secondly,
the most efficient and cost-effective way to collect levies is
to do so at the earliest stage of the sales chain, i.e. the
manufacture or import stage. Shifting the liability to pay
levies onto retailers, as proposed by Mr. Vitorino, would
render the system extremely complex and costly since this would
significantly increase the number of those responsible for
paying the levies and the means needed to ensure billing and
control systems. The prime responsibility of manufacturers and
importers for payment of the levies must go hand in hand with
joint liability of all entities throughout the chain of sales
down to the final consumer in order to avoid potential fraud
and unfair competition. This principle was also agreed between
representatives of rightholders and the ICT industry during the
2008-2009 dialogue. Thirdly, the fact that leviable devices and
blank media differ across Member States means that the same
product can be subject to private copying levies in a Member
State and not in another. Compensation systems should be in
place for all devices and media whose value is increased by
multimedia storage and playback features. Therefore, a
consistent definition of devices and media subject to private
copying levies in the respective Member States should be
sought. Rightholders’ organisations proposed during
the2008-2009 dialogue that all products (devices and media)
able to be used to make private copies of protected works
should be eligible for the private copying compensation scheme,
with a list of products established and regularly updated at EU
level. However, the interruption of the dialogue by the ICT
industry in 2010 did not end in any concrete result and the
Vitorino report was a missed opportunity as, despite suggesting
a degree of harmonisation (such as regarding the definition of
harm), Mr. Vitorino recommended Member State flexibility in the
choice of devices subject to levies. Fourthly,I agree that a
quick and harmonised levy setting procedure should be developed
across Europe. This would mean putting in place a European
framework of definitions, principles and procedures to be
respected by all Member States in the establishment of their
levy setting process.

Fair remuneration of authors and performers

The EU copyright acquis recognises for authors and performers a
number of exclusive rights and, in the case of performers whose
performances are fixed in phonograms, remuneration rights. There
are few provisions in the EU copyright law governing
thetransferof rights from authors or performers to producers62

See e.g. Directive 92/100/EEC, Art.2(4)-(7).

or determining who the owner of the rights is when the work or
other subject matter is created in the context of an employment
contract63

See e.g. Art. 2.3. of Directive 2009/24/EC, Art. 4 of Directive
96/9/EC.

. This is an area that has been traditionally left for Member
States to regulate and there are significant differences in
regulatory approaches. Substantial differences also exist
between different sectors of the creative industries.

Concerns continue to be raised that authors and performers are
not adequately remunerated, in particular but not solely, as
regards online exploitation. Many consider that the economic
benefit of new forms of exploitation is not being fairly shared
along the whole value chain. Another commonly raised issue
concerns contractual practices, negotiation mechanisms,
presumptions of transfer of rights, buy-out clauses and the
lack of possibility to terminate contracts. Some stakeholders
are of the opinion that rules at national level do not suffice
to improve their situationand that action at EU level is
necessary.

[In particular if you are an author/performer:] What is the best
mechanism (or combination of mechanisms) to ensure that you
receive an adequate remuneration for the exploitation of your
works and performances?

[Open question]

Fair remuneration of authors is a very important issue related
in particular to the online distribution of audiovisual works.
For audiovisual authors, such a “best mechanism” to ensure that
they receive adequate remuneration for the exploitation of their
works does not yet exist. “Adequate remuneration” should relate
to the use made of the authors’ works and should in particular
reward the success of works. This is why “buy-out contracts”,
which prevent this from happening, would never amount to
mechanisms guaranteeing adequate remuneration. Contractual
practices in the vast majority of European countries deprive
audiovisual authors of their rights and prevent them from
receiving fair remuneration, not only but in particular for the
onlinedistribution of their works. Audiovisual authors in most
countries are forced, because of their weak bargaining position
and the absence of legislation to protect them, to assign all
their rights and receive a one-off fee at the production stage
with no further payments linked to the exploitation of the
work, except for collectively managed rights such as “cable
retransmission” and “private copying”. These further payments
linked to the exploitation of the work (which can continue for
years) are however essential for authors to make a living
in-between projects. The characteristic of this profession is
that it can take years to prepare a film and enter into
production. I therefore proposes to by-pass these unfair
contractual practices and to develop a sustainable remuneration
system which would secure audiovisual authors’ remuneration for
their making available right in the digital market, taking
advantage of the new technologies. Such a proposal for European
legislation builds on the harmonisation experiencein the EU,
e.g. the 1992 Rental Right Directive which provides for an
“unwaivable remuneration right for the rental” or the 1993
Cable and Satellite Directive which provides for mandatory
collective administration of the “cable retransmission right”.
Concerning “online uses” and in the case an audiovisual author
has transferred his making available right to a producer, he
should retain the right to obtain “equitable remuneration” for
the “making available” which cannot be waived, as it is the
case for the“rental right”. The equitable remuneration should
be paid by audiovisual media services that make audiovisual
works available to the public on- demand. Its administration
should be entrusted to collective management organisations
representing audiovisual authors, unless other audiovisual
authors’ organisations, such as unions or guilds, are in a
better position to guarantee such remuneration in a specific
country. This European legislation is a necessity as
contractual practices are unable to guarantee suchremuneration
to audiovisual authors for the making available of their works.
European producers, which are mainly small companies, are very
much focused on the production stage and little involved in the
subsequent exploitation. They have therefore not developed
industrial processes and mechanisms to trace and administer
payments due to authors for the distribution of their works on
multiple platforms and most of them would prefer not to do it
at all since it would be costly. The only entities to do this
are authors’ collective management organisations. They are
today ready to invest further in order to address the
remuneration due to audiovisual authors for the online
distribution of their works. It has to be clarified that this
proposal does not interferewith the producer’s role. It aims at
organising the remuneration due to authors, once the producer
has decided to make the work available to the public in such a
manner and at the time he chooses. It therefore means that any
on- demand exploitation of anaudiovisual work will continue to
have to be cleared with the producer or with the making
available right holder appointed by the producer or subsequent
contractor. Be it offline or online exploitations, collective
management is the best solution to strikea balance between easy
rights clearance, legal certainty and adequate remuneration for
audiovisual authors.

Is there a need to act at the EU level (for instance to prohibit
certain clauses in contracts)?

 YES – Please explain

I definitely support fairer contractual terms and practices,
whilst acknowledging that this will not solve all the problems,
in particular the remuneration issue of audiovisual authors for
the exploitation of their works. Any initiative in this field
should therefore at least complement the introduction into EU
legislation of an unwaivable right to remuneration of
audiovisual authors for their making available right, based on
the revenues generated from the online distribution of their
works and collected by collective managementorganisations from
final distributors.

 NO – Please explain why

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO OPINION

If you consider that the current rules are not effective, what
would you suggest to address theshortcomings you identify?

[Open question]

In most European countries, audiovisual authors suffer from
unfair contractual terms (excessive transfer of rights in terms
of scope and duration, transfer of rights to remuneration, etc.)
imposed by producers or broadcasters in the individual
negotiation of their contract. These negotiations too often
result in “buy-out contracts”, authors receiving a lump sum
payment for the writing and/or directing of the film, with no
further payment no matter how commercially successful the film
goes on to be. Even when authors sign contracts which respect
their economic interests and provide for additional
remuneration, they rarely receive any payment automatically,
except when collective rules are in place and enforced in
particular by collective rights management organisations. In
parallel to European initiatives to ensure proper remuneration
of authors, consideration should be given to developing key
standards for fair and enforceable contractual terms in
individual contracts, including the prohibition of certain
clauses in contracts. In addition, one way of ensuring the
enforceability of fair contractual terms would be that
producers applying for public funds for the production of films
and audiovisual works should be obliged to provide a copy of
authors’ contracts among the documentation. The body providing
for the financial support would have the obligation to check
it. This would be a strong incentive for producers to better
respect authors’ rights as it would become a pre-condition for
obtaining public financial support.

Respect for rights

Directive 2004/48/EE64

Directive 2004/48/EC of the European Parliament and of the
Council of 29 April 2004 on the enforcement of intellectual
property rights.

provides for aharmonised framework for the civil enforcement of
intellectual property rights, including copyright and related
rights. The Commission has consulted broadly on this text65

You will find more information on the following
website:http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/iprenforcement/directive/index_en.htm

. Concerns have been raised as to whether some of its provisions
are still fit to ensure a proper respect for copyright in the
digital age. On the one hand, the current measures seem to be
insufficient to deal with the new challenges brought by the
dissemination of digital content on the internet; on the other
hand, there are concerns about the current balance between
enforcement of copyright and the protection of fundamental
rights, in particular the right for a private life and data
protection. While it cannot be contested that enforcement
measures should always be available in case of infringement of
copyright, measures could be proposed to strengthen respect for
copyright when the infringed content is used for a commercial
purpose66

For example when the infringing content is offered on a website
which gets advertising revenues that depend on the volume of
traffic.

. One means to do this could be to clarify the role of
intermediaries in the IP infrastructure67

This clarification should not affect the liability regime of
intermediary service providers established by Directive
2000/31/EC on electronic commerce, whichwill remain unchanged.

. At the same time, there could be clarification of the
safeguards for respect of private life and data protection for
private users.

Should the civil enforcement system in the EU be rendered more
efficient for infringements of copyright committed with a
commercial purpose?

 YES – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO – Please explain

The scope of the question and clarifications of the civil
enforcement system in the EU should not be limited to
infringements committed with a “commercial purpose”. All
infringements should be punished, but of course sanctions
should be more severe for commercial purpose infringements.
Leaving all “non-commercial” acts out of protection would not
comply with the respect for the exclusive rights provided by
international and European copyright law. I believe that the
respect for rights and the enforcement of rights are as
important as the scope and definition of the rights themselves.
The “safe harbour regime” provided by the “E-Commerce-
Directive” should therefore be re-considered for copyright
related activities.

 NO OPINION

In particular, is the current legal framework clear enough to
allow for sufficient involvement of intermediaries(such as
Internet service providers, advertising brokers, payment
service providers, domain name registrars, etc.) in inhibiting
online copyright infringements with a commercial purpose? If
not, what measures would be useful to foster the cooperation of
intermediaries?

[Open question]

I strongly encourage the Commission to examine the possibility
of integrating a “notice and takedown” type mechanism in the
future revised Enforcement Directive. In addition the
notification procedure (and the information to be provided) as
well as the impact of this procedure, i.e. the action to be
taken by the hosting provider (immediate take down, or as
quickly as possible within 24 hours) and stay down of illegal
content (not just the links to it) should be harmonised. In
addition, cooperation between rightholders and intermediaries
could also lead to the development of useful “filtering
technologies” which could be developed by platforms and
implemented at the stage when users upload content onto their
servers. This filtering technology would be based on databases
of works which have been registered, with a view to identifying
and blocking illegal content. In this context, cooperation
between rights holders and providers is an essential key to
developing such databases of protected content and should
therefore be encouraged.

Does the current civil enforcement framework ensure that the
right balance is achieved between the right to have one’s
copyright respected and other rights such as the protection of
private life and protection of personal data?

 YES – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO – Please explain

According to the Court of Justice of the European Union a fair
balance must be struck between the variousrights at stake (such
as the right to data protection and the right to property, which
includes IPR) given that both are recognised as fundamental
rights by the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European
Union. In addition, the limited scope of the right to
information to acts carried out on a commercial scale (article
8 of the Directive) prevents the full exercise of the right to
information in all infringing situations. The Commission should
take the opportunity of any revision of the Enforcement
Directive to guarantee an effective balance between IPR and the
data protection right, in order to allow the provision on the
right of information to effectively protect right holders.

 NO OPINION

A single EU Copyright Title

The idea of establishing a unifiedEU Copyright Title has been
present in the copyright debate for quite some time now,
although views as to the merits and the feasibility of such an
objective are divided. A unified EU Copyright Title would
totally harmonise the area of copyright law in the EU and
replace national laws. There would then be a single EU title
instead of a bundle of national rights. Some see this as the
only manner in which a truly Single Market for content
protected by copyright can be ensured, while others believe
that the same objective can better be achieved by establishing
a higher level of harmonisation while allowing for a certain
degree of flexibility and specificity in Member States’ legal
systems.

Should the EU pursue the establishment of a single EU Copyright
Title, as a means of establishing a consistent framework for
rights and exceptions to copyright across the EU, as well as a
single framework for enforcement?

 YES

 NO

 NO OPINION

Should this be the next step in the development of copyright in
the EU? Doesthe current level of difference among the Member
State legislation mean that this is a longer term project?

[Open question]

I do not see the need for “an optional unitary EU Copyright
Title” as already proposed by the Commission in its “Green
Paper on theonline distribution of audiovisual works”. This
proposal was first made by the Commission in 2009 and then
repeated in several documents but the Commission never
explained the need for and the use of such a title. The only
information delivered in the Green Paper was that “authors or
producers of audiovisual works would have the option to
register their works and then obtain a single title that would
be valid throughout the EU”. This very brief presentation
raises two questions: the registration conditionand the nature
of the title. In terms of copyright protection, the Berne
Convention prohibits any formality such as registration as a
condition for the enjoyment and exercise of rights. Authors are
very much attached to this prohibition which guarantees their
rights in all circumstances as far as their creation is
original and therefore deserves protection. Consequently,
authors are very reluctant to see any system based on
registration as it endangers their authorship of works. From a
practical point of view, to pursue such a proposal, the
Commission should then either undertake to revise the Berne
convention or to define the nature of the title out of the
copyright sphere. Because of the formality prohibition, such
titles do not exist in the copyright sphere. The only existing
registries in the audiovisual sector have limited scope and
impact which do not affect rights’ protection and exercise (for
example the necessary work declaration to an authors’ society
for an author to receive related payments, or the French cinema
public registry which offers the statutory publication of
certain contracts).

Other issues

The above questionnaire aims to provide a comprehensive
consultation on the most important matters relating to the
current EU legal framework for copyright. Should any important
matters have been omitted, we would appreciate if you could
bring them to our attention, so they can be properly addressed
in the future.

Are there any other important matters related to the EU legal
framework for copyright?Please explain and indicate how such
matters should be addressed.

[Open question]

-Investing in new technology, software and systems to keep their
licensing operations fit for purpose -Improving their
governance, transparency and accountability to membersand users
-Simplifying their licensing procedures to reduce transaction
costs -Innovating in the kind of licences being offered -Making
it a central objective to see the works of members receive the
greatest possible legitimate distribution -Promoting theuse of
copyright works for education and cultural purposes -Making it
a priority to engage young people directly whether they are
users or creators of copyright works – and sometimes both at
the same time – so that they learn respect for the value of
creativity and are encouraged to express themselves creatively.

