


Public Consultation

on the review of the EU copyright rules

Contents

I.  Introduction  2

A.  Context of the consultation  2

B.  How to submit replies to this questionnaire  3

C.  Confidentiality  3

II.  Rights and the functioning of the Single Market  7

A.  Why is it not possible to access many online content
services from anywhere in Europe?  7

B.  Is there a need for more clarity as regards the scope of
what needs to be authorised (or not) in digital transmissions?
10

1.  The act of “making available”  10

2.  Two rights involved in a single act of exploitation  11

3.  Linking and browsing  12

4.  Download to own digital content  13

C.  Registration of works and other subject matter – is it a
good idea?  14

D.  How to improve the use and interoperability of identifiers
15

E.  Term of protection – is it appropriate?  15

III.  Limitations and exceptions in the Single Market  16

A.  Access to content in libraries and archives  19

1.  Preservation and archiving  19

2.  Off-premises access to library collections  20

3.  E – lending  21

4.  Mass digitisation  22

B.  Teaching  23

C.  Research  25

D.  Disabilities  25

E.  Text and data mining  27

F.  User-generated content  28

IV.  Private copying and reprography  31

V.  Fair remuneration of authors and performers  33

VI.  Respect for rights  34

VII.  A single EU Copyright Title  36

VIII.  Other issues  36

Introduction

Context of the consultation

Over the last two decades, digital technology and the
Internethavereshaped the ways in which content is created,
distributed, and accessed.New opportunities have materialised
for those that create and produce content (e.g. a film, a
novel, a song),for new and existingdistribution platforms,for
institutions such as libraries, for activities such as research
and for citizens who now expect to be able to access content –
for information, education or entertainment purposes–regardless
of geographical borders.

This new environmentalso presentschallenges.One of themis for
the market tocontinue toadapt to new forms of distribution and
use.Another oneis for the legislator to ensure that the system
of rights, limitations to rights and enforcement
remainsappropriateand is adapted to the new environment.This
consultation focuses on the second of these challenges:
ensuring that the EU copyright regulatory framework stays fit
for purpose in the digital environment to support creation and
innovation, tap the full potential of the Single
Market,fostergrowth andinvestment in our economy
andpromotecultural diversity.

In its"Communication on Content in the Digital Single Market"1

COM (2012)789 final, 18/12/2012.

the Commission set out two parallel tracks of action:ontheone
hand, to complete its on-going effort to review and to
modernise the EU copyright legislative framework2

As announced in the Intellectual Property Strategy ' A single
market for Intellectual Property Rights: COM (2011)287 final,
24/05/2011.

3

"Based on market studies and impact assessment and legal
drafting work"as announced in the Communication (2012)789.

with a view to a decision in 2014 on whether to table
legislative reform proposals, andon the other, to facilitate
practical industry-led solutions through the stakeholder
dialogue"Licences for Europe"on issues on which rapid progress
was deemed necessary and possible.

The"Licences for Europe"process has been finalised now4

See the document “Licences for Europe – tem pledges to bring
more content
online”:http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/copyright/docs/licences-for-europe/131113_ten-pledges_en.pdf.

. The Commission welcomes the practical solutions stakeholders
have put forward in thiscontext and will monitor their
progress. Pledges have been made by stakeholders in all four
Working Groups (cross borderportability ofservices,
user-generated content,audiovisual andfilm heritageand text and
data mining). Taken together, the Commission expects these
pledgesto bea further step in making the user environment
easier in many different situations. The Commission also takes
note of the fact that two groups –user-generated content
andtext and data mining–did not reach consensus among
participating stakeholders on either the problems to be
addressed or on the results. Thediscussions andresults
of"Licences for Europe"will be also taken into account in the
context of the review of the legislative framework.

As part of thereview process, the Commission is now launching a
public consultation onissuesidentified in the Communication on
Content in the Digital Single Market, i.e.:"territoriality in
the Internal Market, harmonisation, limitations and exceptions
to copyright in the digital age; fragmentation of the EU
copyright market; and how to improve the effectiveness and
efficiency of enforcement while underpinning its legitimacy in
the wider context of copyright reform".As highlighted in the
October 2013 European CouncilConclusions5

EUCO 169/13, 24/25 October 2013.

"Providing digital services andcontentacross the single market
requires the establishment of a copyright regime for the
digital age. The Commission will therefore complete its
on-going review of the EU copyright framework in spring 2014.
It is important to modernise Europe's copyright regime and
facilitate licensing, while ensuring a high level protection of
intellectual property rights and taking into account
culturaldiversity".

This consultationbuildson previous consultationsand public
hearings, in particularthose onthe"Green Paper on copyright in
the knowledge economy"6

COM(2008)
466/3,http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/copyright/copyright-infso/index_en.htm#maincontentSec2.

,the"Green Paper on the online distribution of audiovisual
works"7

COM(2011) 427
final,http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/consultations/2011/audiovisual_en.htm.

and"Content Online"8

http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/consultations/2009/content_online_en.htm.

. These consultationsprovidedvaluablefeedback from
stakeholderson a number of questions,on issues as diverse as
theterritorialityofcopyrightand possible ways to overcome
territoriality,exceptionsrelated to the online dissemination of
knowledge,and rightholders’remuneration, particularly in the
audiovisual sector.Views were expressed by stakeholders
representing all stages in the value chain, including right
holders, distributors, consumers, and academics. The questions
elicited widely diverging views on the best way to proceed.
The"Green Paper on Copyright in the Knowledge Economy"was
followed up by a Communication. The replies to the"Green Paper
on the online distribution of audiovisual works"have fed into
subsequent discussions on the Collective Rights Management
Directive and into the current review process.

How tosubmitreplies tothis questionnaire

You are kindly asked to send your repliesby5March2014inaMS Word,
PDForOpenDocumentformattothefollowinge-mailaddressof DG Internal
Market and
Services:markt-copyright-consultation@ec.europa.eu.Please note
that replies sentafterthat datewill not be taken into account.

This consultation is addressedto different categories of
stakeholders. To the extent possible, the questions indicate
the category/iesof respondents mostlikelyto be concernedby
them(annotation in brackets, before the actual question).
Respondentsshould nevertheless feel freeto reply to any/all of
the questions. Also, please note that,apart from the question
concerning the identification of the respondent, none of the
questions is obligatory.Replies containing answers only to part
of the questions will be also accepted.

You are requested toprovideyour answers
directlywithinthisconsultation document. For the“Yes/No/No
opinion”questionsplease put the selected answer
inboldandunderlineit so it is easy for us to see your
selection.

In your answers to the questions, you are invited to refer to
the situation in EU Member States.You are also invitedin
particularto indicate, where relevant, what would be the
impactof options you put forwardin terms of costs,
opportunities and revenues.

The public consultation is available in English.
Responsesmay,however,be sent in any of the 24officiallanguages
of the EU.

Confidentiality

The contributionsreceivedin this round of consultation as well
as a summary report presenting the responses in a statistical
and aggregated form will be published on the website of DG
MARKT.

Please note thatallcontributionsreceivedwill be
publishedtogether with the identity of the contributor, unless
the contributor objects tothepublication oftheirpersonal data
on the grounds that such publication would harm his or her
legitimate interests. In this case,the contributionwillbe
published in anonymous form upon the contributor's explicit
request. Otherwise the contribution will not be published nor
willits content bereflected in the summary report.

Pleaseread ourPrivacy statement.

Please identify yourself:

Name:

IngeBulckens…………………………………………………………………………………..

…………………………………………………………………………………………………..

In the interests of transparency, organisations (including, for
example, NGOs, trade associations and commercial enterprises)
are invited to provide the public with relevant information
about themselves by registering in the Interest Representative
Register and subscribing to its Code of Conduct.

If you are a Registered organisation, please indicate your
Register ID number below. Your contribution will then be
considered as representing the views of your organisation.

…………………………………………………………………………………………………..

…………………………………………………………………………………………………..

If your organisation is not registered, you have the opportunity
toregister now. Responses from organisations not registered will
be published separately.

If you would like to submit your reply on an anonymous basis
pleaseindicate it belowby underlining thefollowinganswer:

Yes, I would like to submit my reply on an anonymous basis

Type of respondent(Pleaseunderlinethe appropriate):

End user/consumer(e.g.internet user,reader, subscriberto musicor
audiovisualservice,
researcher,student)ORRepresentativeofendusers/consumers

for the purposes of this questionnaire normally referred to
in questions as "end users/consumers"

Institutional user(e.g. school,university,
researchcentre,library, archive)ORRepresentativeof
institutional users

for the purposes of this questionnaire normally referred to
in questions as"institutional users"

Author/PerformerORRepresentativeof authors/performers

Publisher/Producer/BroadcasterORRepresentative of
publishers/producers/broadcasters

the two above categoriesare,for the purposes of this
questionnaire, normally referred to in questions as"right
holders"

Intermediary/Distributor/Other service provider(e.g.online music
or audiovisual service, games platform, social media, search
engine, ICT industry)ORRepresentative of
intermediaries/distributors/other service providers

for the purposes of this questionnaire normally referred to
in questions as"service providers"

Collective Management Organisation

Public authority

Member State

Other(Please explain):

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Rights and the functioning of the Single Market

Why is it not possible to accessmanyonline content servicesfrom
anywhere in Europe?[Theterritorialscope of the rights involved
in digital transmissions and the segmentation of the market
through licensing agreements]

Holders of copyright and related rights –e.g. writers, singers,
musicians-do not enjoya singleprotection in the EU. Instead,
they are protected on the basis of a bundle of national rights
in each Member State. Those rights have been largely harmonised
by the existingEUDirectives. However,differences remain andthe
geographical scopeof the rightsis limited to the territory of
the Member State granting them. Copyright is thus territorial
in the sense that rights are acquired and enforced on a
country-by-country basis under national law9

This principle has been confirmed by the Court of justice on
several occasions.

.

The dissemination of copyright-protected content on the Internet
–e.g. by a music streaming service,orbyanonline e-book
seller–thereforerequires, in principle,an authorisation for
each national territory in which the content is communicatedto
the public. Rightholdersare, of course,in a position togranta
multi-territorial or pan-Europeanlicence, such thatcontent
services can be provided in several Member States and across
borders.A number of stepshave beentaken at EU level to
facilitate multi-territoriallicences: the proposal for a
Directive on Collective Rights Management10

Proposalfor a Directiveof the European Parliament and of the
Councilof 11 July 2012 on collective management of copyright
and related rights and multi-territorial licensing of rights in
musical works for online uses in the internal market, COM(2012)
372 final.

should significantly facilitate the delivery of
multi-territorial licences in musical worksfor online
services11

CollectiveManagementOrganisations play a significant role inthe
management of online rights for musical works in contrastto
thesituation where online rights are licenseddirectly by right
holders such asfilm or record producers or by newspaper or book
publishers.

;thestructured stakeholder dialogue “Licences for Europe”12

You can find more information on the following website:
http://ec.europa.eu/licences-for-europe-dialogue/.

and market-led developments such as the on-going work in the
Linked Content Coalition13

You can find more information on the following
website:http://www.linkedcontentcoalition.org/.

.

"Licences for Europe" addressed in particular the specific issue
of cross-border portability, i.e. the ability of consumers
having subscribed to online services in their Member State to
keep accessing them when travelling temporarily to other Member
States. As a result, representatives of the audio-visual sector
issued a joint statement affirming their commitment to continue
working towards the further development of cross-border
portability14

See the document “Licences for Europe – tem pledges to bring
more content
online”:http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/copyright/docs/licences-for-europe/131113_ten-pledges_en.pdf.

.

Despite progress, there are continued problems
withthecross-borderprovisionof, and access to, services. These
problems are most obviousto consumerswanting to access
servicesthatare madeavailable in Member Statesother than the
one in which they live.Not all online services are available in
all Member States and consumers face problems when trying
to access such services across borders. In some instances,
even if the“same”service is available in all Member States,
consumerscannotaccess theservice across borders (they can
onlyaccess their“national” service, and if they try to
accessthe "same" servicein another Member State they are
redirected to theonedesignatedfortheir country of residence).

Thissituationmayin part stem from the territoriality of
rightsand difficulties associated with the clearing of rights
in different territories.Contractual clauses in licensing
agreements between rightholders and distributors and/or between
distributors and end users mayalsobe at the origin of some of
the problems (denial of access, redirection).

The main issueat stake hereis,therefore,whether furthermeasures
(legislative or non-legislative, including market-led
solutions)need tobe taken at EU level in the medium term15

For possible long term measures such as the establishment of
aEuropean Copyright Code(establishinga single title) see
section VII of this consultation document.

to increase the cross-border availability of content services in
the Single Market,while ensuring an adequate level of
protectionfor right holders.

[In particular if you arean enduser/consumer:]Have you faced
problems whentryingto access online services in an EU Member
State other than the one in which you live?

YES - Please provide examples indicating the Member State,
the sector and the type of content concerned (e.g. premium
content such as certain films and TV series, audio-visual
content in general, music, e-books, magazines, journals and
newspapers, games, applications and other software)

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO

NO OPINION

[In particular if you are a service provider:]Have you faced
problems when seeking to provide online services across
bordersin the EU?

 YES - Please explain whether such problems, in your
experience, are related to copyright or to other issues (e.g.
business decisions relating to the cost of providing services
across borders, compliance with other laws such as consumer
protection)? Please provide examples indicating the Member
State, the sector and the type of content concerned (e.g.
premium content such as certain films and TV series,
audio-visual content in general, music, e-books, magazines,
journals and newspapers, games, applications and other
software).

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO

 NO OPINION

[In particular if you are a right holder or a collective
management organisation:]Howoftenare youaskedtogrant
multi-territorial licences?Please indicate, if possible, the
number of requests per year and provide examples indicating the
Member State, the sector and the type of content concerned.

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

If you have identified problems in the answers to any of the
questions above – what would be the bestway to tacklethem?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

[In particular if you are a right holder or a collective
management organisation:]Are there reasons why, evenin cases
where you holdall thenecessaryrights forall theterritoriesin
question,youwould still find it necessaryor justifiedto impose
territorial restrictions onaservice provider (in order, for
instance, to ensure that access to certain content is not
possible in certainEuropeancountries)?

YES – Please explain by giving examples

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO

NO OPINION

[In particular if you aree.g. a broadcaster ora service
provider:]Are there reasons why,evenin cases where you have
acquiredall thenecessaryrights for all the territoriesin
question,youwould still find it necessaryor justifiedto impose
territorial restrictions on the service recipient (in order for
instance, to redirect the consumer to a different website than
the one he is trying to access)?

 YES – Please explain by giving examples

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO

 NO OPINION

Do you think that further measures (legislative or
non-legislative, including market-led solutions) are needed at
EU level to increase the cross-border availability of content
services in the Single Market, while ensuring an adequate level
of protection for right holders?

YES – Please explain

.……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO– Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO OPINION

Is there a need for more clarityas regardsthe scope ofwhat needs
to be authorised (or not) in digital transmissions?[The
definition of the rightsinvolved in digital transmissions]

The EU framework for the protection of copyright and related
rights in the digital environment is largely established by
Directive 2001/29/EC16

Directive 2001/29/EC of the European Parliament and of the
Council of 22 May 2001 on the harmonisation of certain aspects
of copyright and related rights in the information society.

on the harmonisation of certain aspects of copyright and related
rights in the information society. OtherEU directives in this
fieldthatare relevant in the online environment are those
relating to the protection of software17

Directive 2009/24/EC of the European Parliament and of the
Council of 23 April 2009 on the legal protection of computer
programs.

and databases18

Directive 96/9/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council
of 11 March 1996 on the legal protection of databases.

.

Directive 2001/29/ECharmonises the rights of authors and
neighbouring rightholders19

Film and record producers, performers and broadcasters are
holders of so-called “neighbouring rights” in, respectively,
their films, records, performances and broadcast. Authors’
content protected by copyright is referred to as a “work” or
“works”, while content protected by neighbouring rights is
referred to as “other subject matter”.

which are essential for the transmission of digital copies of
works (e.g. an e-book) and other protected subject matter (e.g.
a record in a MP3 format) over the internetor similar digital
networks.

The most relevant rights for digital transmissionsare the
reproduction right, i.e. the right to authorise or prohibit the
making of copies20

The right to “authorise or prohibit direct or indirect,
temporary or permanent reproduction by any means and in any
form, in whole or in part” (see Art. 2 of Directive 2001/29/EC)
although temporary acts of reproduction of a transient or
incidental nature are, under certain conditions, excluded (see
art. 5(1) of Directive 2001/29/EC).

,(notably relevant at the start of the transmission – e.g. the
uploading of a digital copy of a work to a server in view of
making it available – and at the users’ end – e.g. when a user
downloads a digital copy of a work) and the communication to
the public/making available right, i.e. the rights to authorise
or prohibit the dissemination of the works in digital networks21

The right to authorise or prohibit any communication to the
public by wire or wireless means and to authorise or prohibit
the making available to the public “on demand” (seeArt. 3 of
Directive 2001/29/EC).

. These rights are intrinsically linked in digital
transmissionsandboth need to be cleared.

Theact of“making available”

Directive 2001/29/EC specifiesneitherwhatis covered bythe making
available right(e.g. the upload,the accessibility by the
public,theactualreception by the public)norwherethe act of
“making available” takes place. This does not raise
questionsif the act is limited to a single territory.
Questionsarise however when the transmission covers several
territories and rights need to be cleared (does the act of
"making available" happeninthe country of the upload only?in
each of the countries where the content is potentially
accessible?in each of the countries where the content
iseffectivelyaccessed?).The most recent case law of the Court
of Justice of the European Union (CJEU)suggests that a relevant
criterion is the“targeting” of a certainMember State'spublic22

See in particularCase C-173/11(Football Dataco vs Sportradar)
andCase C-5/11 (Donner) for copyright and related rights, and
Case C-324/09 (L’Oréal vs eBay) for trademarks. With regard to
jurisdiction seealso joined Cases C-585/08 and C-144/09 (Pammer
and Hotel Alpenhof)andpending CaseC-441/13 (Pez Hejduk);
seehowever,adopting a different approach, CaseC-170/12
(Pinckney vs KDG Mediatech).

. According to this approachthe copyright-relevantact (whichhas
tobe licensed)occursat leastin those countries which are
“targeted” by the onlineservice provider.A service provider
“targets” a group of customers residing in a specific country
when it directsits activity to that group, e.g. via
advertisement, promotions, a language or a currency
specifically targeted at that group.

Isthe scope of the“making available”right in cross-border
situations – i.e. when content is disseminated across borders
–sufficiently clear?

YES

NO– Please explain how this could be clarified and what type
of clarification would be required (e.g. as in "targeting"
approach explained above, as in "country of origin" approach23

The objective of implementing a “country of origin”approachis to
localise the copyright relevant act that must be licenced in a
single Member State (the "country of origin", which could be
for example the Member State in whichthe content is uploaded or
wherethe service provider is established), regardless of in how
many Member States the work canbe accessed or received. Such an
approachhas already been introduced at EU level with regard to
broadcasting by satellite(seeDirective 93/83/EEC on the
coordination of certain rules concerning copyright and rights
related to copyright applicable to satellite broadcasting and
cable retransmission).

)

Country of origin approach…………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO OPINION

[In particular if you are a right holder:]Coulda clarification
of the territorial scope of the“making available”right have
aneffect on therecognition of yourrights (e.g.whetheryou are
considered to be an author or not,whetheryou are considered to
have transferred your rights or not),onyourremuneration,
oronthe enforcement of rights(including the availability of
injunctive relief24

Injunctive relief is a temporary or permanent remedy allowing
the right holder to stop or prevent an infringement of his/her
right.

)?

YES –Please explain how such potential effects could be
addressed

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO

NO OPINION

Two rights involved in a single act of exploitation

Each act oftransmission in digital networks entails(in the
current state of technology and law) several reproductions.This
means that there are two rights that apply to digital
transmissions: the reproduction right and the making available
right. Thismay complicate the licensing of works for online
usenotably whenthetwo rights are held bydifferent
persons/entities.

[In particular if you a service provider or a right holder:]Does
the application of two rights toa single act of economic
exploitation in the online environment (e.g. a download)create
problemsfor you?

 YES – Please explainwhat type of measures would be needed in
order to address such problems (e.g. facilitation of joint
licences when the rights are in different hands,legislation to
achieve the "bundling of rights")

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO

 NO OPINION

Linking and browsing

Hyperlinks are references to data that lead a user from one
location in the Internet to another. They are indispensable for
the functioning of the Internet as a network. Severalcasesare
pending before the CJEU25

Cases C-466/12 (Svensson), C-348/13 (Bestwater International)
and C-279/13 (C More entertainment).

in which the question has been raised whether the provision of
a clickable link constitutes an act of communication to the
public/making available to the public subject to the
authorisation of the rightholder.

A user browsing the internet (e.g. viewing a web-page) regularly
creates temporary copies of works and other subject-matter
protected under copyright on the screen and in the 'cache'
memory of his computer. A question has been referred to the
CJEU26

Case C-360/13 (Public Relations Consultants Association Ltd).See
alsohttp://www.supremecourt.gov.uk/decided-cases/docs/UKSC_2011_0202_PressSummary.pdf.

as towhether such copies are always covered by the mandatory
exception for temporary acts of reproduction provided for in
Article 5(1) of Directive 2001/29/EC.

Should the provision of a hyperlink leading to a work or other
subject matter protected under copyright,either in generalor
under specific circumstances,besubject to the authorisation of
the rightholder?

YES – Please explainwhether you consider this to be the case
in general,or under specific circumstances,and why

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO – Please explainwhether you consider this to be the case
in general,or under specific circumstances,and why(e.g. because
it does not amount to an act of communication to the public – or
to a new public, or because it should be covered by a copyright
exception)

Het internet bestaat bij de gratie van hyperlinks. Het verschaft
internauten een wegwijzernaarinformatie en dientdanook beschermd
te worden op basis van het grondrecht van toegang tot informatie
(zoals beschermd door art. 10 EVRM).Het kan dan ook niet dat het
louter linken naar auteursrechtelijk beschermd materiaal ook als
een auteursrechtelijk relevante handelingwordtgekwalificeerd.
Indien het Hof van Justitie toch in die zin zou oordelen dan
dient het linken onder een auteursrechtelijke uitzondering te
vallen.

Diezelfde opmerking kan ook worden gemaakt voor het embedden van
beschermd materiaal op sociale media zoals bvb Pinterest. Ook
het embedden dient als een niet auteursrechtelijk relevante
handeling te worden beschouwd, minstens te worden toegelaten op
basis van een uitzondering op het
auteursrecht..…………………………………………………………………………………………………

……………………………………………………………………………………….

NO OPINION

Should the viewing of a web-pagewhere this impliesthetemporary
reproduction of a work or other subject matterprotected under
copyrighton the screen andin thecache memoryof the user’s
computer,either in general or under specific circumstances,be
subject to the authorisation of the rightholder?

YES – Please explainwhether you consider this to be the case
in general,or under specific circumstances,and why

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO – Please explainwhether you consider this to be the case
in general,or under specific circumstances,and why(e.g. because
it is or should be covered by a copyright exception)

Dit dient beschouwd te worden als een tijdelijke/technische
reproductiehandeling in de zin van art. 5.1
Auteursrechtrichtlijn 2001/29/EG en dus onder een uitzondering
te vallen……………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO OPINION

Download to own digital content

Digital content is increasinglybeing
boughtviadigitaltransmission(e.g. download to own). Questions
arise as to the possibility forusersto dispose of the filesthey
buy inthismanner(e.g. by selling themorby giving them as a
gift).Theprinciple of EU exhaustion of the distribution right
applies in the case of the distribution of physical copies
(e.g. when a tangible article such as a CD or a book, etc. is
sold, the right holder cannot preventthefurther distributionof
that tangible article)27

See also recital 28 of Directive 2001/29/EC.

. Theissuethat ariseshere is whether this principlecan also be
applied in the caseof an act of transmission equivalent in its
effect to distribution (i.e. where the buyer acquires the
property of the copy)28

In Case C-128/11 (Oracle vs. UsedSoft) the CJEU ruled that an
author cannot oppose the resale of a second-hand licence that
allows downloading his computer program from his website and
using it for an unlimited period of time. The exclusive right
of distribution of a copy of a computer program covered by such
a licence is exhausted on its first sale.While it is thus
admitted that the distribution right may be subject to
exhaustion in case of computer programs offered for download
with the right holder’s consent, the Court was careful to
emphasise that it reached this decision based on the Computer
Programs Directive. It was stressed that this exhaustion rule
constituted alex specialisin relation to the Information
Society Directive (UsedSoft, par. 51, 56).

.This raises difficultquestions, notably relating to the
practical application of such an approach (how to avoid
re-sellers keeping and using a copy ofawork after they have
“re-sold” it– this is often referred to as the “forward and
delete” question) as well astothe economicimplications of the
creation of a second-hand market of copies of perfect quality
that never deteriorate(in contrast to the second-hand market
for physical goods).

[In particular if you are an enduser/consumer:]Have you
facedrestrictionswhen trying to reselldigital files that
youhavepurchased(e.g.mp3 file,e-book)?

YES–Please explain by giving examples

.…………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO

NO OPINION

[In particular if you are a right holderor a service provider:]
What would betheconsequencesofproviding a legal framework
enabling the resale ofpreviouslypurchaseddigital content?
Please specify per market(type of content)concerned.

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Registration of works andother subject matter – is it a good
idea?

Registration is not often discussed in copyrightin the EUas the
existing internationaltreaties in the area prohibit formalities
as a condition for theprotection and exerciseofrights.
However,this prohibition is not absolute29

For example, it does not affect “domestic” works – i.e.works
originating inthe country imposing the formalitiesas opposed to
works originating inanothercountry.

.Moreover a system of registration does not need to bemade
compulsory or constitute a precondition for the protection and
exercise of rights. Witha longer term ofprotectionand with the
increased opportunities that digital technology
providesfortheuse of content(includingolder works and works
thatotherwisewouldnot havebeen disseminated),the advantages and
disadvantages of a system of registration are increasingly
beingconsidered30

On the basis of Article 3.6 of the Directive 2012/28/EU of the
European Parliament and of the Council of 25 October 2012 on
certain permitted uses of orphan works, a publicly accessible
online database is currently being set up by the Office
forHarmonisation of theInternalMarket (OHIM)for the
registration of orphan works.

.

Wouldthecreation ofa registration system at EU levelhelp in the
identification and licensing of works and other subject matter?

YES

NO

NO OPINION

What would bethe possible advantagesof such a system?

Het klaren van rechten zou veel efficiënter kunnen verlopen. Nu
worden veel werkendoor erfgoedinstellingenniet ontsloten omdat
de juiste rechthebbenden vaak moeilijk of niet kunnen worden
gevonden.Een dergelijk systeem zou onmiddellijk alle
noodzakelijke informatie beschikbaar kunnen stellen. Het
isdienaangaandebovendien belangrijk dat ook de transfer van
rechten wordt geregistreerd.Deze registratiezouhetprobleem
vantoekomstigeverweesde werken kunnen
oplossen.…………………………………………….

What would bethe possible disadvantagesof such a system?

[Open question]

Geen………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Whatincentives forregistrationbyrightholderscouldbe envisaged?

[Open question]

De vraag stelt zich of rechthebbendenhiervoor
veelaanmoedigingenmoetenkrijgen.Een dergelijk systeem bestaat
ook in het kader van andere intellectuele eigendomsrechten
(zoals merken, patenten, modellen etc.) waarbij de
rechthebbenden hiertoe gewoonweg verplicht worden zonder het
verkrijgen van enige aanmoediging.

Anderzijds hebben rechthebbenden hier alleen maar voordelen bij.
Zij zullen immers sneller kunnen gevonden worden waardoor hun
inkomsten voor gebruik potentieel kunnen stijgen.

Een mogelijke stimulans – gekoppeld weliswaar aan een minder
lange auteursrechtelijke beschermingstermijndan op vandaag(zie
vraag 20) – is een verlenging van de auteursrechtelijke
beschermingstermijn door deze registratie.

.……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

How to improve theuse andinteroperability ofidentifiers

There are many private databases ofworks and other subject
matterheld by producers, collective management organisations,
and institutions such aslibraries, which are based to a greater
or lesser extent on the use of(more or less)interoperable,
internationally agreed ‘identifiers’. Identifierscan be
compared to a reference number embedded in a work,are specific
to the sector in which they have been developed31

E.g. the International Standard Recording Code (ISRC) is used to
identify recordings, the International Standard Book Number
(ISBN) is used to identify books.

, and identify, variously, the work itself, the owner or the
contributor to a work or other subject matter.There are notable
examples of where industry is undertaking actions to improve the
interoperability of such identifiers and databases. The Global
Repertoire Database32

You will find more information about this initiative on the
following website:http://www.globalrepertoiredatabase.com/.

should, once operational,provide a single source of information
on the ownership and control of musical works worldwide. The
Linked Content Coalition33

You will find more information about this initiative(funded in
part by the European Commission)on the following website:
www.linkedcontentcoalition.org.

was established to develop building blocks for the expression
and management of rights and licensing across all content and
media types. It includes the development ofa Rights Reference
Model (RRM) – a comprehensive data model for all types of
rights in all types of content. The UK Copyright Hub34

You will find more information about this initiative on the
following website:http://www.copyrighthub.co.uk/.

is seeking to take such identification systems a step further,
and to create a linked platform, enabling automated licensing
across different sectors.

Whatshouldbethe role of theEUin promoting the adoption
of identifiers in the content sector, and in promoting the
development and interoperability of rights ownership and
permissions databases?

[Open question]

Het is aangewezen dat de EU, initiatieven om tot unieke
identifiers te komen, zou faciliteren. Deze identifiers zijn
immers onontbeerlijkom content opzoekbaar te maken en eenduidig
te koppelen aan de hand van nieuweinternettechnologie (linked
data, semantisch web…). De EU zou
desgevallendpubliek-privateconstructies mee kunnen helpen
opzetten waarbij het wel essentieel is dat niet alleen
rechthebbenden maar ook(institutionele)gebruikers hierin
opgenomen worden.

In ieder geval is het belangrijk dat databanken van identifiers
vrijelijk door iedereen kunnen geraadpleegd worden.

Term of protection– is it appropriate?

Works and other subject matter are protected under copyright for
a limited period of time. After the term of protection has
expired, a work falls into the public domain and can be freely
used by anyone (in accordance with the applicable national
rules on moral rights). The Berne Convention35

Berne Convention for the Protection of Literary and Artistic
Works,http://www.wipo.int/treaties/en/ip/berne/.

requiresa minimum term of protection of 50 years after the death
of the author. The EUrulesextend this term of protection to 70
years after the death of the author (as do many other
countries, e.g. the US).

With regard to performers in the music sector and phonogram
producers, theterm provided for in theEU rulesalsoextend20
years beyond what is mandated in international
agreements,providingfor a term of protection of 70 years after
the first publication. Performers and producers in the
audio-visual sector, however, do not benefit from such an
extended term of protection.

Arethe current terms ofcopyright protection still appropriate in
the digital environment?

YES– Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO– Please explain if they should be longer or shorter

De auteursrechtelijke beschermingstermijn is overdreven lang
geworden.Voorerfgoedinstellingen is het hierdoor vaak
onmogelijk om huncollecties te ontsluiten, ook al betreft het
vaak werken die commercieel niet (meer) exploiteerbaar zijn. De
meerkost om de rechten te klaren weegt dan ook niet op tegen de
voordelen van deze lange beschermingstermijn.Deze termijn
dientdusin ieder gevalteruggeschroefd te worden naar de
beschermingstermijn uit de Berner Conventie van 50jaarp.m.a

Idealiter dient de beschermingstermijn in het auteursrecht even
lang te zijn als in het octrooirecht (20 jaar). Deze termijn
kan eventueel verlengd worden tot debeschermingstermijnvan 50
jaar p.m.a.op voorwaarde dat de auteursrechthebbenden zijn werk
laat registeren(zie vraag 17-18).Hierdoor zullen veel werken
sneller in het publiek domein vallen en enkel de economisch
interessante werken beschermd blijven. De EU wordt dan ook
gevraagd dit op internationaal vlak, in het kader van een
mogelijke herziening van de Berner Conventie, bespreekbaar te
maken.

NO OPINION

Limitations and exceptions in the Single Market

Limitations and exceptions to copyright and related rights
enable the use of works and other protected
subject-matter,without obtaining authorisation from the
rightholders,for certain purposes and to a certain extent (for
instance the use for illustrationpurposesof an extract from a
novelby a teacher in a literature class). At EU level they are
established in a number of copyright directives, most notably
Directive 2001/29/EC36

Plus Directive 96/9/ECon the legal protection of
databases;Directive 2009/24/ECon the legal protection of
computer programs,and Directive 92/100/ECon rental right and
lending right.

.

Exceptions and limitations in the national and EU copyright laws
have to respect international law37

Article 9(2) of the Berne Convention for the Protection of
Literary and Artistic Works (1971); Article 13 of the TRIPS
Agreement (Trade Related Intellectual Property Rights) 1994;
Article 16(2) of the WIPO Performers and Phonograms Treaty
(1996); Article 9(2) of the WIPO Copyright Treaty (1996).

.In accordance with international obligations, the EU acquis
requires that limitations and exceptionscanonlybeapplied in
certain special cases which do not conflict with a normal
exploitation of the work or other subject matter and do not
unreasonably prejudice the legitimate interest of the
rightholders.

Whereas the catalogue of limitations and exceptions included in
EU law is exhaustive (no other exceptions can be applied to the
rights harmonised at EU level)38

Other than the grandfathering of the exceptions of minor
importance for analogue uses existing in Member States at the
time of adoption ofDirective 2001/29/EC(see, Art. 5(3)(o)).

, these limitations and exceptions are often optional39

With the exception ofcertain limitations: (i)in the Computer
Programs Directive,(ii) in the Database Directive,(iii) Article
5(1) in theDirective 2001/29/ECand(iv) the OrphanWorksDirective.

, in the sense that Member States are free to reflect in
national legislation as many or as few of them as they wish.
Moreover, the formulation of certain of the limitations and
exceptions is general enough to give significant flexibility to
the Member States as to how, and to what extent, to implement
them (if they decide to do so). Finally, it is worth noting
that not all of the limitations and exceptions included in the
EU legal framework for copyright are of equivalent significance
in policy terms and in terms of their potential effect on the
functioning of the Single Market.

In addition, in the same manner that the definition of the
rights is territorial (i.e. has an effect only within the
territory of the Member State), the definition of the
limitations and exceptions to the rights is territorial too (so
an act that is covered by an exception in a Member State "A" may
still require the authorisation of the rightholder once we move
to the Member State "B")40

Only theexception established in therecent Orphan Works
Directive(a mandatory exceptionto copyright and related rights
in the case where the rightholders are not known or cannot be
located) has been givena cross-border effect, which means that,
for instance, once a literary work – for instance a novel – is
considered an orphan work in a Member State, that same
novelshall be considered an orphan work in all Member Statesand
can beused and accessed in all Member States.

.

The cross-border effect of limitations and exceptions also
raises the question of fair compensation of rightholders. In
some instances, Member States are obliged to compensate
rightholders for the harminflicted on them bya limitation or
exception to their rights. In otherinstances Member States are
not obliged, but may decide, to provide for such compensation.
If a limitation or exception triggering a mechanism of fair
compensation were to be given cross-border effect (e.g. the
books are used for illustration in an online course given by an
university in a Member State "A" and the students are in a
Member State"B") then there would also be a need to clarify
which national law shoulddeterminethe level of that
compensation and who should pay it.

Finally, the question of flexibility and adaptabilityis being
raised:what is the best mechanism to ensure that the EU and
Member States’ regulatory frameworks adapt when necessary
(either to clarify that certain uses are covered by an
exception or to confirm that for certain uses the authorisation
of rightholders is required)?The main question here is whether
a greaterdegree of flexibility can be introduced in the EU and
Member States regulatory framework while ensuringthe
requiredlegal certainty,including for the functioning of the
Single Market, and respecting the EU's international
obligations.

Are there problems arising from the fact that most limitations
and exceptions provided in the EUcopyrightdirectives are
optional for the Member States?

YES – Please explain by referring to specific cases

Door het optioneel houden van de uitzonderingen is van een
harmonisatie van het auteursrecht binnen de EU (op het vlak van
de uitzonderingen) geen sprake. Het
isvoorerfgoedinstellingenvaak onbegonnen werk om
bijdigitaliseringsprojecten na te gaan of een bepaalde
uitzondering ook in een andere lidstaat is omgezet en indien
het geval, of deze uitzondering dezelfde voorwaarden stelt of
niet.Het is ten andere discriminatoir dat binnen de
EU,erfgoedinstellingen in een bepaalde lidstaat wel onder een
uitzondering gebruik mogen maken van beschermd materiaal,en
instellingen in een andere lidstaat dat dan weer niet mogen.

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO OPINION

Should some/all of the exceptions be made mandatory and, if so,
is there a need for a higher level of harmonisation of such
exceptions?

YES – Please explain by referring to specific cases

De uitzonderingen die op EU niveau worden opgelegd dienen
inderdaad verplichtend te worden omgezet (en dit volgens
identiek dezelfde voorwaarden) in de lidstaten

Minstens dient een basisset van uitzonderingen (wetenschappelijk
onderzoek, onderwijs, museale functies, bibliotheek en
archiefwezen verplicht uniform worden omgezet)

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO OPINION

Should any new limitations and exceptions be added toor removed
fromthe existing catalogue?Please explain by referring to
specific cases.

[Open question]

- e-boeken moeten onder de uitzondering voor openbare uitlening
vallen

- Musea enandereerfgoedinstellingen moeten hun collectie
digitaal kunnen ontsluiten (al is het in een lage resolutie).
Zeker wanneer het gaat om unieke werkexemplaren (zoals bvb een
schilderij) waar vaak het volgrecht voor betaald is, dient
ontsluiting op de eigen website van de instelling mogelijk te
zijn

-wetenschappelijke informatie die met belastingsgeld is
gegenereerd (zoals werken gecreëerd door bezoldigde professoren
of wetenschappers)moet menin een open repositorykunnenontsluiten

-toelaten vandata mining voor wetenschappelijk onderzoek

- in het kader van niet-commerciëlegebruikmoeten volledige
werken (zoals bvb een foto) kunnen worden gebruikt

-erfgoedinstellingenmoeten de mogelijkheid krijgen
omzoveelarchief kopieën van hun collecties te makenals
noodzakelijk is

- de collecties van archieven, musea en bibliotheken(die geen
commerciële waarde meer hebben)zou online raadpleegbaar moeten
kunnen zijn

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Independently from the questions above, is there a need to
provide for agreaterdegree of flexibility in the EU regulatory
framework for limitations and exceptions?

YES – Please explain why

Het is absoluut noodzakelijk dat uitzonderingen op het
auteursrecht op een meer flexibele wijze kunnen worden
toegepast.De uitzonderingen zijn immers niet geformuleerd in
een technologie neutrale manier en kunnen dan ook niet worden
toegepast op onbekende gebruiksvormen ten tijde van de redactie
van de uitzondering.Technologische evoluties volgen zichechter
zo snel op dat vaakniet kan worden gewacht op de wetgever om
bestaande uitzonderingen hieraan aan te passen. Hierdoor komt
beschermd materiaal ook veel sneller beschikbaar voor de
creatieve
industrie……………………………………………………………………………………………….……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO – Please explain why

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO OPINION

If yes, what would be the best approach to provide for
flexibility? (e.g. interpretation by national courts and the
ECJ, periodic revisions of the directives, interpretations by
the Commission, built-in flexibility, e.g. in the form of a
fair-use or fair dealing provision / open norm, etc.)? Please
explain indicating what would be the relative advantages and
disadvantages of such an approachas well asitspossible effects
on the functioning of the Internal Market.

[Open question]

Een open norm, zoals een fair use uitzondering is noodzakelijk.
Deze open norm dient te bestaan naast een vaste lijst van
uitzonderingen. Hierdoor kan een rechtscollege bepaalde
gebruiken die in se van niet-commerciële aard zijn en de
belangen van de rechthebbenden nauwelijks schaden toelaten.
Minstens dient, in afwijking van de rechtspraak van het Hof van
Justitie, worden gesteld dat uitzonderingen niet op een
restrictieve manier moeten worden uitgelegd, zodat zij naar
analogie door de nationale rechtscolleges op gelijkaardige
gebruiken kunnen worden toegepast.

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Does the territoriality of limitations and exceptions, in your
experience, constitute a problem?

YES – Please explain why and specify which exceptions you are
referring to

Bijdigitaliseringsprojectenof online projectenis hetonduidelijk
of bepaalde nationale uitzonderingen ook in het land vaneen
partner-instelling vantoepassing zijn.Bovendien stellen veel
erfgoedinstellingen vast dat nationale rechthebbenden of
beheersvenootschappen geen licenties willen geven om deel te
nemen aan pan-Europese projecten zoals bvb Europeana.

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO – Please explain why and specify which exceptions you are
referring to

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO OPINION

In the event that limitations and exceptions established at
national level were to have cross-border effect, how should the
question of “fair compensation” be addressed, when such
compensation is part of the exception? (e.g. who pays whom,
where?)

[Open question]

De fair compensation dient geregeld te worden binnen de country
of origin

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Access to content in libraries and archives

Directive 2001/29/EC enables Member States to reflect in their
national law a range of limitations and exceptions for the
benefit of publicly accessible libraries, educational
establishments and museums, as well as archives. If
implemented, these exceptions allow acts of preservation and
archiving41

Article 5(2)c of Directive 2001/29.

and enable on-site consultation of the works and other subject
matter in the collections of such institutions42

Article 5(3)nof Directive 2001/29.

. The public lending (under an exception or limitation) by these
establishments of physical copies of works and other subject
matter is governed by the Rental and Lending Directive43

Article 5 of Directive 2006/115/EC.

.

Questions arise as to whether the current framework continues to
achieve the objectives envisaged or whether it needs to be
clarified or updated to cover use in digital networks. At the
same time, questions arise as to the effect of such a possible
expansion on the normal exploitation of works and other subject
matter and as to the prejudice this may cause to rightholders.
The role of licensing and possible framework agreements between
different stakeholders also needsto be considered here.

Preservation and archiving

The preservation of the copies of works or other subject-matter
held in the collections of cultural establishments (e.g. books,
records, or films) – the restoration or replacement of works,
the copying of fragile works - may involve the creation of
another copy/ies of these works or other subject matter. Most
Member States provide for an exception in their national laws
allowing for the making of such preservation copies. The scope
of the exception differs from Member State to Member State (as
regards the type of beneficiary establishments, the types of
works/subject-matter covered by the exception, the mode of
copying and the number of reproductions that a beneficiary
establishment may make).Also, the current legal status of new
types of preservation activities (e.g. harvesting and archiving
publicly available web content) is often uncertain.

(a)[In particular if you are an institutional user:]Haveyou
experienced specific problems when trying to use an exception
to preserve and archive specific works or other subject matter
in your collection?

(b)[In particular if you are arightholder:]Have you experienced
problems with the use by libraries, educational establishments,
museum or archives of the preservation exception?

YES – Please explain, by Member State, sector, and the type
of use in question.

Het is soms onduidelijkvoor erfgoedinstellingen (dus niet enkel
bibliotheken en archieven)wanneer er sprake is van
preserveringsdoeleinden in de betekenis van de
uitzondering.Volgens art. 22 §18° van de Belgische Auteurswet
is het aantal reproducties beperkt in functie van en
gerechtvaardigd door het voor de bewaring van het culturele en
wetenschappelijke patrimonium gestelde doel.Voor archieven is
het essentieel datzij altijddigitale preserveringskopieën mogen
nemen en dit vooralle mogelijke archiveringsdoeleinden

Indien digitale werken door technische voorzieningen (zoals
kopieerbeveiligingen) worden beschermd dan moet het met
toepassing van de preserveringsuitzondering mogelijk zijn om
deze technische voorziening te omzeilen.

Tot slot dient de preserveringsuitzondering ook van toepassing
te zijn op werken die online beschikbaar werden gesteld. De
preseveringsuitzondering moet m.a.w. zowel op analoge als
digitale werkenkunnen worden toegepast.

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO

NO OPINION

If there are problems, how would theybestbe solved?

[Open question]

De bestaande uitzondering moet aan minder voorwaarden gekoppeld
zijn waardoor deze meer flexibel kan worden toegepast.
Erfgoedinstellingen moeten preserveringskopieën kunnen maken
zolang hiermee geen rechtstreeks commercieel voordeel wordt
nagestreefd.

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

If your view is that a legislative solution is needed, what
would be its main elements? Which activities of the beneficiary
institutions should be coveredand under which conditions?

[Open question]

Alle mogelijkehandelingen in het kader van archiveringen
preserveringdienen onder deze uitzondering te vallen(waaronder
reproducties als deel van grootschalige
digitaliseringsprojecten, back-up kopieën en reproducties in
het kader van format shifting)

………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

If your view is that a different solution is needed, what would
it be?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Off-premises access to library collections

Directive 2001/29/EC provides an exception
fortheconsultationofworks and other subject-matter(consulting
an e-book, watching a documentary) viadedicated terminals on
the premises of such establishments for the purpose of research
and private study. The online consultation of works and other
subject-matter remotely (i.e. when the library user is not on
the premises of the library) requires authorisation andis
generallyaddressed in agreements between universities/libraries
and publishers.Some argue that the law rather than agreements
should provide for the possibility to, and the conditions for,
granting online access to collections.

(a)[In particular if you are an institutional user:]Have you
experienced specific problems when trying to negotiate
agreements with rights holders that enable you to provide
remote access, including across borders,to your collections (or
parts thereof) for purposes of research and private study?

(b)[Inparticular if you are an end user/consumer:]Have you
experienced specific problems when trying to consult, including
across borders,works and other subject-matter held in the
collections of institutions such as universities and national
libraries when you are not on the premises of the institutions
in question?

(c)[In particular if you are arightholder:]Have you negotiated
agreements with institutional users that enable those
institutions to provide remote access, including across
borders, to the works or other subject-matter in their
collections, for purposes of research and private study?

[Open question]

Rechthebbenden staan zeer weigerachtig tegenover het aanbieden
doorerfgoedinstellingen(en dus niet enkel bibliotheken en
archieven)van remote access tot huncollecties.
Iedereen die aangesloten is bij de instelling dientperfect
vanafzijn thuiscomputer te kunnen grasduinen (eventueel met DRM
waardoor downloaden of printen onmogelijk is) in de
collectiewerken vande instelling(desgevallend met toepassing
van een intern netwerk met login en
paswoord).Licentievoorwaarden mogen deze uitzondering
nietkunnenneutraliseren.

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

If there are problems, how would theybestbe solved?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

If your view is that a legislative solution is needed, what
would be its main elements? Which activities of the beneficiary
institutions should be coveredand under which conditions?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

If your view is thatadifferent solutionisneeded, what would it
be?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

E –lending

Traditionally, public libraries haveloanedphysical copies of
works (i.e. books, sometimes also CDs and DVDs) to their users.
Recent technological developments have made it technically
possible for libraries to provide users with temporary access
to digital content, such as e-books, music or films via
networks. Under the current legal framework, libraries need to
obtain the authorisation of the rights holders toorganise
suche-lending activities. In various Member States, publishers
and libraries are currently experimenting with different
business models for the making available of works online,
including direct supply of e-books to libraries by publishers
or bundling by aggregators.

(a)[In particular if you are alibrary:]Have you experienced
specific problems when trying to negotiate agreements to enable
the electronic lending (e-lending), including across borders,
ofbooks or other materials held in your collection?

(b)[In particular if you are an enduser/consumer:]Have you
experienced specific problems when trying to borrow booksor
other materials electronically (e-lending), including across
borders,from institutions such as public libraries?

(c)[In particular if you are aright holder:]Have you negotiated
agreements with libraries to enable them to lend books or other
materials electronically, including across borders?

YES – Please explain with specific examples

Uitgevers staan huiverachtig tegenover het toestaan van uitlenen
van e-boeken door bibliotheken. Vaak staan vrij hoge
licentievergoedingen hier tegenover

Onredelijke prijszettingen. Bijvoorbeeld: voor sommige uitgevers
moeten Vlaamse bibliotheken samen evenveel gegarandeerd
uitleengeld genereren met een bevolking van 6 mio inwoners, als
Nederlandse bibliotheken met 16 mio
inwoners.………………………………………………………………………………….

Uitgeversstaan bibliotheken niet toe alle e-boeken op de markt
te integreren in hun e-lending modellen.Dit maakt het
onmogelijk voor bibliotheken om hun opdracht te vervullen
binnen het cultuurbeleid:garanderen vantoegang voor iedereen
tot informatie en cultuur, ook al is die toegang aan een aantal
beperkingen onderworpen.

Sommige auteurs laten niet toe dat hun boeken via e-lending ter
beschikking staan.

Uitgevers staan e-lenen enkel toe als de burger betaalt. Daarmee
dwingen uitgevers bibliotheken in een commercieel model.

Uitgevers weigeren tot nog toe garanties te geven dat e-lenen op
langere termijn kan. E-lenen kan enkel ontwikkeld worden binnen
‘pilootprojecten’.Zij houden zich ook steeds het recht voor
om boeken uit e-leenmodellen terug te trekken.Hierdoor zijn
bibliotheken onzeker overhet lange termijn rendement van hun
investeringen en van hun positie ten aanzien van hun
gebruikers.

Uitgevers weigeren om e-lenengratis te maken voor specifieke
maatschappelijke doelgroepen (armen,sociaal zwakken).Hierdoor
wordt het voor bibliotheken onmogelijk om een specifieke
opdracht te vervullen: toegang tot informatie en cultuur
garanderen voor iedereen en zorgen voor een meer sociale en
democratische kennismaatschappij.

Zelfs ‘onsitu consultatie’ is voor sommige rechthebbenden niet
evident. Zij beschouwen het inkijken van e-boeken binnen de
muren als een vorm van uitlening.

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO

 NO OPINION

If there are problems, how would theybestbe solved?

[Open question]

Het uitlenen van e-boeken dient onder de uitzondering van
openbare uitlening (zoals analoge boeken) te vallen. Op grond
van het UsedSoft arrest van het Hof van Justitie kan immers
geargumenteerd worden dat ook het uitlenen van e-boeken onder
deze uitzondering valt.

Het moetbovendienmogelijk zijn te voorzien in een regulator die
verantwoordelijk is voor marktanalyses en die aanspreekbaar is
om onredelijke prijszettingen aan te klagen.

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

The following two questions are relevant bothtothis point (n° 3)
and the previous one (n° 2).

[In particular if you are an institutional user:]What
differences do you see in the management of physical and online
collections, including providing access to your subscribers?
What problems have you encountered?

[Open question]

Enorme verschillen bestaan tussen analoge en digitale
collecties. Analoge collecties kunnen worden aangekocht en zijn
dus eigendom van de instelling. Digitale collecties kunnen enkel
in licentie worden genomen. Het gebruik van deze digitale
collecties hangt dan ook in zeer grote mate af van
dewillekeurvan de licentiegevers. Licentievoorwaarden
formuleren bovendiendikwijlsgebruiksmodaliteiten die niet van
toepassing zijn op analoge collecties.

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

[In particular if you are a right holder:]What difference do you
see betweenlibraries’traditional activities such as on-premises
consultation or public lending and activities such as
off-premises (online, at a distance) consultation and
e-lending? What problems have you encountered?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Mass digitisation

The term “mass digitisation” is normally used to refer to
efforts by institutions such as libraries and archives to
digitise (e.g. scan) the entire content or part of their
collections with an objective to preserve these collections
and, normally, to make them available to the public. Examples
are efforts by libraries to digitise novels form the early part
of the 20thcentury or whole collections of pictures of
historical value. This matter has been partly addressed at the
EU level by the 2011 Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) on key
principles on thedigitisation and making available of out
of commerce works (i.e. works which are no longer found in the
normal channels of commerce),whichis aiming to facilitate mass
digitisation efforts (for books and learned journals) on the
basis of licence agreements between libraries and similar
cultural institutions on the one hand and the collecting
societies representing authors and publishers on the other44

You will find more information about his MoU on the following
website:http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/copyright/out-of-commerce/index_en.htm.

. Provided the required funding is ensured (digitisation
projects are extremely expensive),the result of this MoU should
be that books that are currently to be found only in the
archives of, for instance, libraries will be digitised and made
available online to everyone.The MoU is based on voluntary
licences (granted by Collective Management Organisations on the
basis of the mandates they receive from authors and publishers).
Some Member States may need to enact legislation to ensure the
largest possible effect ofsuchlicences (e.g. by establishing in
legislation a presumption of representation of a collecting
society or the recognition of an “extended effect” to the
licences granted)45

France and Germany have already adopted legislation to back the
effects of the MoU.The French act (LOI n° 2012-287 du 1er mars
2012 relative à l'exploitation numérique des livres
indisponibles du xxe siècle) foresees collectivemanagement,
unless the author or publisher in question opposes such
management.The German act (Gesetz zur Nutzung verwaister und
vergriffener Werke und einer weiteren Änderung des
Urheberrechtsgesetzes vom 1.Oktober 2013) contains a legal
presumption of representation by a collectingsociety in
relation to works whose rightholdersare not members of the
collecting society.

.

[In particular if you are an institutional user,engaging or
wanting to engage in mass digitisation projects, a right
holder, acollective management organisation:]Wouldit be
necessaryin your country to enact legislationto ensure
thattheresults of the 2011 MoU (i.e. the agreements concluded
between libraries and collecting societies) have a cross-border
effect so that out of commerce works can be accessed across the
EU?

YES – Please explain why and how it could best be achieved

Vooreerst is het belangrijk om te onderlijnen dat
massadigitalisering meer is dan wat de MOU uit 2011 en de
orphan works directive 2012 poogt te bereiken. Een meer
omvattende benadering van massadigitalisering en navolgende
ontsluiting is dringend nodig. De MOU en de orphan works
directive lijken alvast ontoereikend te zijn om dit alles te
bereiken

De MOU lijkt alvast in de praktijk dode letter te blijven.Het is
dus inderdaad aangewezen dat wetgevende initiatieven
dienaangaande worden genomen.…………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO OPINION

Would it be necessary to develop mechanisms, beyond those
already agreed for other typesof content (e.g.for audio- or
audio-visual collections, broadcasters’ archives)?

YES – Please explain

The public has a legitimate interest in having online access to
the collections of all publicly accessible libraries, museums
and archives across Europe. There is no good reason for
limiting mechanisms that create such access to certain types of
content.

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO OPINION

Teaching

Directive 2001/29/EC46

Article 5(3)aof Directive 2001/29.

enables Member States to implement in their national legislation
limitations and exceptions for the purpose of illustration for
non-commercial teaching. Such exceptions would typically allow
a teacher to use parts of or full works to illustrate his
course, e.g. by distributing copies of fragments of a book or
of newspaper articles in the classroom or by showing protected
content on a smart board without having to obtain authorisation
from the right holders. The open formulation of this (optional)
provision allows for rather different implementation at Member
States level.The implementation of the exception differs from
Member State to Member State, with several Member States
providing instead a framework for the licensing of content for
certain educational uses. Some argue that the law should
provide for better possibilities for distance learningand study
at home.

(a)[In particular if you are an enduser/consumeror an
institutional user:]Have you experienced specific problems when
trying to use works or other subject-matter for illustration for
teaching, including across borders?

(b)[In particular if you arearight holder:]Have you
experiencedspecific problems resulting from the wayin
whichworks or other subject-matter are used for illustration
for teaching, including across borders?

YES – Please explain

De uitzonderingen zijn aan te strikte voorwaarden onderworpen
zodat ze zelden kunnen toegepast
worden.…………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO

 NO OPINION

If there are problems, how would theybestbe solved?

[Open question]

Gebruikvan beschermd materiaalvooralle
mogelijkeonderwijsdoeleinden dient toegelaten te zijn, voor
zover de normale exploitatie van het werk niet in het gedrang
komt.

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

What mechanisms exist in the market place to facilitate the use
of content for illustration for teaching purposes? How
successful are they?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

If your view is that a legislative solution is needed, what
would be its main elements? Which activities of the beneficiary
institutions should be coveredand underwhatconditions?

[Open question]

Gebruikvan beschermd materiaalvooralle
mogelijkeonderwijsdoeleinden dient toegelaten te zijn, voor
zover de normale exploitatie van het werk niet in het gedrang
komt

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

If your view is that a different solution is needed, what would
it be?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Research

Directive 2001/29/EC47

Article 5(3)a of Directive 2001/29.

enables Member States to choose whether to implement in their
national laws a limitation for the purpose of non-commercial
scientific research. The open formulation of this (optional)
provision allows for rather different implementationsat Member
States level.

(a)[In particular if you arean enduser/consumeror an
institutional user:]Have you experienced specific problems when
trying to use works or other subject matter in the context of
research projects/activities, including across borders?

(b)[In particular if you are a right holder:]Have you
experiencedspecific problemsresulting from the wayin whichworks
or other subject-matter are used in the context of research
projects/activities, including across borders?

YES – Please explain

De uitzonderingen zijn aan te strikte voorwaarden onderworpen
zodat ze zelden kunnen toegepast worden.Zelfs al heeft een
onderwijsinstelling een licentie verkregen, dan nog is bulk
download van artikelen niet toegelaten. Indien een onderzoeker
aldus een grote literatuurstudie wil doen of data mining op de
tekst wil toepassen etc, dan kan hij dit niet doen zonder
nogmaals de toestemming van de rechthebbende te verkrijgen.
Dezetoestemming zou niet mogen worden geweigerd, zeker niet
wanneer het om tijdelijke opslag voor onderzoek gaat.

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO

NO OPINION

If there are problems, how would theybestbe solved?

[Open question]

Gebruik vooralle mogelijkeonderzoeksdoeleinden dient toegelaten
te zijn, voor zover de normale exploitatie van het werk niet in
het gedrang komt

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

What mechanisms exist in the Member States to facilitate the use
of content for research purposes? How successful are they?

[Open question]

Gebruik voor onderzoeksdoeleinden dient(eventueel via gesloten
netwerken)toegelaten te zijn, voor zover de normale exploitatie
van het werk niet in het gedrang komt

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Disabilities

Directive 2001/29/EC48

Article 5 (3)b of Directive 2001/29.

provides for an exception/limitation for the benefit of people
with a disability.The open formulation of this (optional)
provision allows for rather different implementationsat Member
States level.At EU and international level projects have been
launched to increase the accessibility of works and other
subject-matter for persons with disabilities (notably by
increasing the number of works published in special formats and
facilitating their distribution across the European Union)49

The European Trusted Intermediaries Network (ETIN)resulting
froma Memorandum of Understanding betweenrepresentatives of the
right-holder community (publishers, authors, collecting
societies) and interested parties such as associations for
blind and dyslexic
persons(http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/copyright/initiatives/access/index_en.htm)
and the Trusted Intermediary Global Accessible Resources (TIGAR)
project in WIPO (http://www.visionip.org/portal/en/).

.

The Marrakesh Treaty50

MarrakeshTreaty to Facilitate Access to Published Works by
Visually Impaired Persons and Persons with Print
Disabilities,Marrakesh, June 17 to 282013.

has been adopted to facilitate access to published works for
persons who are blind, visually impaired, or otherwise print
disabled. The Treaty creates a mandatory exception to copyright
that allows organisations for the blind to produce, distribute
and make available accessible format copies to visually
impaired persons without the authorisation of the rightholders.
The EU and its Member States have started work to sign and
ratify theTreaty. This may require the adoption of certain
provisions at EU level (e.g. to ensure the possibility to
exchange accessible format copies across borders).

(a)[In particular if you are a person with a disability or an
organisation representing persons with disabilities:]Have you
experienced problems with accessibility to content, including
across borders,arising from Member States’ implementation of
this exception?

(b)[In particular if you are an organisationproviding services
for persons with disabilities:]Have you experienced problems
when distributing/communicating works published in special
formats across the EU?

(c)[In particular if you are arightholder:]Have you
experiencedspecific problems resulting from the application of
limitations or exceptions allowing for the
distribution/communication of works published in special
formats, including across borders?

YES – Please explain

(a)

Een eerste fundamenteel probleem inzake inclusie: een persoon
met een leesbeperking kan enkel werken lenen en niet kopen, een
persoon zonder leesbeperking heeft de keuze tussen lenen en
kopen

Een persoon met een leesbeperking stuit op Europese
landsgrenzen. Een Vlaming die een Spaans boek wil lezen en
hiervoor zicht richt tot de bibliotheek voor mensen met een
leesbeperking van ONCE in Spanje, kan dit niet krijgen: niet
door lid te worden van de Spaanse bibliotheek, maar ook niet
door het via de Vlaamse Luisterpuntbibliotheek aan te vragen.
Idem dito voor wie geïnteresseerd is in Engelse of Duitse

(b)

Net zoals particuliere personen met een leesbeperking geen
toegang krijgen tot boeken in een aangepast leesformaat
(Daisy-luisterboek of brailleboek)in een ander Europees land,
is het ook voor de bibliotheekorganisaties moeilijk zo niet
onmogelijk om boeken uit een ander land op te vragen en aan de
eigen lezers door te geven.

Dit probleem wordt bovendien bemoeilijkt door het gegeven dat in
sommige Europese landen de distributie  van boeken in aangepast
leesformaat beperkt is tot mensen met een visuele  beperking en
niet open staat voor mensen met een andere leesbeperking zoals
dyslexie. Dit is bijvoorbeeld het geval zowel in Frankrijk als
in Duitsland. Wat eigenlijk in tegenspraak is met het Europese
MOU (2010) en het internationale WIPO-verdrag (2013).

Binnen België leidt dit zelfs tot het bizarre gegeven dat de
Franstalige Daisy-luisterboeken van de Franstalige bibliotheek
(Ligue Braille) niet beschikbaar zijn voor personen met
dyslexie, zowel voor de Nederlandstaligen als de Franstaligen
in België, maar dat anderzijds de Nederlandstalige
Daisy-luisterboeken van de Vlaamse Luisterpuntbibliotheek wel
beschikbaar zijn voor alle Belgische personen met een
leesbeperking

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO

 NO OPINION

If there are problems, what could be done to improve
accessibility?

[Open question]

Voor alle doelgroepen van mensen met een leesbeperking in Europa
is het van groot belang dat het internationale WIPO-verdrag
(Marrakesh, 2013) snel wordt getekend en geratificeerd, zowel
door Europa als door alle individuele lidstaten, zodat de
omzetting naar een leesbaar formaat een recht wordt, zodat de
distributie van boeken in aangepast leesformaat naar alle
doelgroepen mogelijk wordt, zodat cross-border lending
probleemloos wordt, zodat zowel online distributie als
distributie op een drager (Daisy-cd, braille-print) tot de
mogelijkheden behoort.

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

What mechanisms exist in the market place to facilitate
accessibility to content? How successful are they?

[Open question]

ETIN exists already two years but didn’t realise concrete
results for the target groups. The ETIN-project for
cross-border lending of accessible materials for print disabled
persons is important, but can only be successful if the EU
supports it by project money and give support to a first step
in the project in which cross-border lending between  countries
with the same language becomes possible.

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Text and data mining

Text and data mining/content mining/data analytics51

For the purpose of the present document, the term “text and data
mining” will be used.

are different terms used to describe increasingly important
techniques used in particular by researchers for the
exploration of vast amounts of existing texts and data (e.g.,
journals, web sites, databases etc.). Through the use of
software or other automated processes, an analysis is made of
relevant texts and data in order to obtain new insights,
patterns and trends.

The texts and data used for mining are either freely accessible
on the internet or accessible through subscriptions to e.g.
journals and periodicals that give access to the databases of
publishers. A copy is made of the relevant texts and data (e.g.
on browser cache memories or in computers RAM memories or onto
the hard disk of a computer), prior to the actual analysis.
Normally, it is considered that to mine protected works or
other subject matter, it is necessary to obtain authorisation
fromtherightholdersfor the making of such copiesunless such
authorisation can be implied (e.g. content accessible to
general public without restrictions on the internet,
openaccess).

Some argue that the copies required for text and data mining are
covered by the exception for temporary copies in Article 5.1 of
Directive 2001/29/EC. Others consider that text and data mining
activities should not even be seen as covered by copyright. None
of this is clear, in particular since text and data mining does
not consist only of a single method, but can be undertaken in
several different ways. Important questions also remain as to
whether the mainproblems arising in relation to this issue go
beyond copyright (i.e. beyond the necessity or not to obtain
the authorisation to use content) and relate rather to the need
to obtain “access” to content (i.e. being able to use e.g.
commercial databases).

A specific Working Group was set up on this issue in the
framework of the "Licences for Europe" stakeholder dialogue. No
consensus was reached among participating stakeholders on either
the problems to be addressed or the results. At the same time,
practical solutions to facilitate text and data mining of
subscription-based scientific content were presented by
publishers as an outcome of “Licences for Europe”52

See the document “Licences for Europe – tenpledges to bring more
content
online”:http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/copyright/docs/licences-for-europe/131113_ten-pledges_en.pdf.

.In the context of these discussions, other stakeholders argued
that no additional licences should be required to mine material
to which access has been provided through a subscription
agreement and considered that a specific exception for text and
data mining should beintroduced, possibly on the basis of
a distinction between commercial and non-commercial.

(a)[In particular if you are an enduser/consumeror an
institutional user:]Have you experienced obstacles, linked to
copyright, when trying to use text or data mining methods,
including across borders?

(b)[In particular if you are a service provider:]Have you
experienced obstacles, linked to copyright, when providing
services based on text or data mining methods, including across
borders?

(c)[In particular if you are a rightholder:]Have you
experiencedspecific problems resulting from the useof textand
data mining in relation to copyright protected content,
including across borders?

YES – Please explain

Online databanken kunnen vaak niet het voorwerp uitmaken van
data mining. Dit wordt ook vaak in de licentievoorwaarden
uitgesloten(bvb. in Science Direct mogen geen grote
hoeveelheden artikelen worden gedownload).

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO OPINION

If there are problems, how would theybestbe solved?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

If your view is that a legislative solution is needed, what
would be its main elements? Which activities should be
coveredand underwhatconditions?

[Open question]

Data mining dient onder een uitzondering te vallen. Het moet
toegelaten zijn omtools allerhande op tekstenlos te
laten.Voorbeeld: OCT op gedigitaliseerd papier om leesbaarder
te maken, vindbaarheid te vergroten, doorzoekbaar te maken etc.

.……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

If your view is that a different solution is needed, what would
it be?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Are there other issues, unrelated to copyright, that constitute
barriers to the use of text or data mining methods?

[Open question]……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

User-generated content

Technological and service developments mean that citizens can
copy, use and distribute content at little to no financial
cost. As a consequence, new types of online activities are
developing rapidly, including the making of so-called
“user-generated content”. While users can create totally
original content,theycan also take one or several pre-existing
works, change somethinginthe work(s), and upload the result on
the Internet e.g. to platforms and blogs53

A typical example could be the “kitchen” or “wedding” video
(adding one's own video to a pre-existing sound recording), or
adding one's own text to a pre-existing photograph.Other
examples are “mash-ups” (blending two sound recordings), and
reproducing parts of journalistic work (report, review etc.) in
a blog.

. User-generated content (UGC) can thus cover the modification
of pre-existing works even if the newly-generated/"uploaded"
work does notnecessarilyrequire a creative effort and results
from merely adding, subtracting or associating some
pre-existing content with other pre-existing content. This kind
ofactivityis not “new” as such. However, the development of
social networking and social media sitesthatenable users to
share content widely has vastly changed the scale of such
activities and increased the potential economic impact forthose
holding rights inthe pre-existing works. Re-use is no longer the
preserve of a technically and artistically adept elite. With the
possibilities offered by the new technologies,re-use is open to
all, at no cost.This in turn raises questionswith regard to
fundamental rights suchthe freedom of expression and theright
to property.

A specific Working Group was set up on this issue in the
framework of the "Licences for Europe" stakeholder dialogue. No
consensus was reached among participating stakeholders on either
the problems to be addressed or the resultsor even the
definition of UGC.Nevertheless, a wide range of views were
presented as to the best way to respond to this phenomenon. One
view was to say that a new exception is needed to cover UGC,in
particularnon-commercial activities by individuals such as
combining existing musical works with videos, sequences of
photos, etc.Another view was that no legislative change is
needed: UGC is flourishing, and licensing schemes are
increasingly available (licence schemes concluded between
rightholders and platforms as well as micro-licences concluded
between rightholders and the users generating the content. In
any event, practical solutions to ease user-generated content
and facilitate micro-licensing for small users werepledgedby
rightholders across different sectors as a result of the
“Licences for Europe” discussions54

See the document “Licences for Europe – tenpledges to bring more
content
online”:http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/copyright/docs/licences-for-europe/131113_ten-pledges_en.pdf.

.

(a)[In particular if you are an enduser/consumer:]Have you
experienced problems when trying to use pre-existing works or
other subject matter to disseminate new content on the
Internet, including across borders?

(b)[In particular if you are aservice provider:]Have you
experienced problems when users publish/disseminatenew content
based on the pre-existing works or other subject-matter through
your service, including across borders?

(c)[In particular if you are a right holder:]Have you
experiencedproblems resulting from the waythe usersare using
pre-existing works or other subject-matter to disseminate new
content on the Internet, including across borders?

YES – Please explain by giving examples

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO

 NO OPINION

(a)[In particular if you are an end user/consumer or aright
holder:]Have you experienced problems when trying to ensure
that the work you have created (on the basis of pre-existing
works) is properly identified for online use?Are proprietary
systems sufficient in this context?

(b)[In particular if you are a service provider:]Do you provide
possibilities for users that are publishing/disseminating the
works they have created (on the basis of pre-existing works)
through your service to properly identify these works for
online use?

YES – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO OPINION

(a)[In particular if you are an enduser/consumer or aright
holder):]Have you experienced problems when trying to be
remunerated for the use of the work you have created (on the
basis of pre-existing works)?

(b)[In particular if you are a service provider:]Do you provide
remuneration schemes for users publishing/disseminating the
works they have created (on the basis of pre-existing works)
through your service?

YES – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO OPINION

If there are problems, how would theybestbe solved?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

If your view is that a legislative solution is needed, what
would be its main elements? Which activities should be
coveredand underwhatconditions?

[Open question]

UGC dient in het kader van de expressievrijheid beschermd te
worden door een uitzondering

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

If your view is that a different solution is needed, what would
it be?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Private copying and reprography

Directive 2001/29/EC enables Member States to implement in their
national legislation exceptions or limitations to the
reproduction right for copies made for private useand
photocopying55

Article 5. 2)(a) and (b)of Directive 2001/29.

.Levies are charges imposed at national level on goods typically
used forsuchpurposes(blank media, recording equipment,
photocopying machines, mobile listening devices such as mp3/mp4
players, computers, etc.) with a viewtocompensating rightholders
forthe harm they suffer whencopiesaremade
withouttheirauthorisation by certain categories of persons
(i.e. natural persons making copies for their private use)
orthroughuse of certain technique (i.e. reprography).In that
context, levies are importantforrightholders.

With the constant developments in digital technology, the
question arises as to whether the copying of files
byconsumers/end-userswho have purchasedcontent online -e.g.
when a person has bought an MP3 fileandgoes on
tostoremultiplecopies of thatfile(in her computer, her tablet
and her mobile phone)- also triggers, or should trigger,the
application of private copying levies. It is argued that, in
some cases, these leviesmay indeedbe claimed by rightholders
whether or not the licence fee paid by the service provider
already covers copies made by the end user. Thisapproachcould
potentially lead to instances of double payments whereby levies
could be claimed on top ofservice providers’licencefees56

Communication "Unleashing the Potential of Cloud Computing in
Europe", COM(2012) 529 final.

57

These issues were addressed in the recommendations of Mr António
Vitorino resulting from the mediation on private copying and
reprography levies.Youcan consult these recommendationson the
following
website:http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/copyright/docs/levy_reform/130131_levies-vitorino-recommendations_en.pdf.

.

There is also an on-going discussion as to the application or
not of levies to certain types ofcloud-based services such as
personal lockers or personal video recorders.

In your view, is there a need to clarifyat the EU levelthe scope
and application of the private copying and reprography
exceptions58

Art. 5.2(a) and 5.2(b) of Directive 2001/29/EC.

in the digital environment?

YES – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO OPINION

Should digital copies made by end users for private purposes in
the context of a service that has been licensed by
rightholders, and where theharmto the rightholder is minimal,
be subject to private copying levies?59

This issue was also addressed in the recommendations of Mr
Antonio Vitorino resulting from the mediation on private
copying and reprography levies

 YES – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO OPINION

How wouldchanges inlevieswith respect to the application
toonline services (e.g. services based on cloud computing
allowing, for instance,users to have copies on different
devices)impactthe development and functioning ofnewbusiness
modelson the one hand and rightholders’ revenue on the other?

[Open question]

Dit zou nadelig zijn voor de ontwikkeling van nieuwe business
modellen.……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Would you see an added value in making levies visible on the
invoices for products subject to levies?60

This issue was also addressed in the recommendations of Mr
Antonio Vitorino resulting from the mediation on private
copying and reprography levies.

YES – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO OPINION

Diverging national systems levy different products and apply
different tariffs. This results in obstacles to the free
circulation of goods and services in the Single Market. At the
same time, many Member States continue to
allowtheindiscriminate application of private copying levies to
all transactions irrespective of the person to whom the product
subject to a levyis sold(e.g. private person or business). In
that context, not all Member States have ex ante exemption
and/orex post reimbursement schemes which could remedy these
situations and reduce the number of undue payments61

This issue was also addressed in the recommendations of Mr
Antonio Vitorino resulting from the mediation on private
copying and reprography levies.

.

Have you experienced a situation whereacross-border transaction
resulted inundue levy payments, or duplicate payments of the
same levy, or other obstacles to the free movement of goods or
services?

YES – Please specify the type of transaction and indicate the
percentage oftheundue payments. Please also indicate howa priori
exemption and/orex post reimbursement schemes could help to
remedy the situation.

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO OPINION

What percentage of products subject to a levy is sold to persons
other than natural persons for purposes clearly unrelated to
private copying? Do any of those transactions result in undue
payments? Please explain in detail the example you provide
(type of products, type of transaction, stakeholders, etc.).

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Where such undue payments arise, what percentage of trade do
they affect? To what extent could a priori exemptionsand/orex
post reimbursement schemes existingin some Member Stateshelp to
remedy the situation?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Ifyou have identified specificproblems with the
currentfunctioning of thelevy system, howwouldthese problems
bestbesolved?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Fairremuneration of authors and performers

The EU copyright acquis recognises for authors and performers a
number of exclusive rights and, in the case of performers whose
performances are fixed in phonograms, remuneration rights. There
are few provisions in the EU copyright law governing
thetransferof rights from authors or performers to producers62

See e.g. Directive 92/100/EEC, Art.2(4)-(7).

or determining who the owner of the rights is when the work or
other subject matter is created in the context ofanemployment
contract63

See e.g.Art. 2.3. of Directive 2009/24/EC,Art. 4 of Directive
96/9/EC.

.This is an area that has been traditionally left for Member
States to regulate and there are significant differences in
regulatory approaches. Substantial differences also
existbetween differentsectors ofthecreative industries.

Concerns continue to be raised that authors and performers are
not adequately remunerated, in particularbut not solely, as
regards online exploitation. Many consider that the economic
benefit of new forms of exploitation is not being fairly shared
along the whole value chain. Another commonly raised issue
concerns contractual practices, negotiation mechanisms,
presumptions of transfer of rights, buy-out clauses and the
lack of possibility to terminatecontracts. Some stakeholders
are of the opinion that rules atnational leveldonotsuffice to
improve their situation and that action at EU level is
necessary.

[In particular if you are an author/performer:] What is the best
mechanism (or combination of mechanisms) to ensurethatyou
receive an adequate remuneration for the exploitation of your
works and performances?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Istherea need to actat theEU level (for instance to prohibit
certain clauses in contracts)?

 YES – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO – Please explain why

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO OPINION

If you consider that the current rules are not effective, what
would you suggest to addresstheshortcomingsyou identify?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Respectforrights

Directive 2004/48/EE64

Directive 2004/48/EC of the European Parliament and of the
Council of 29 April 2004 on the enforcement of intellectual
property rights.

provides for a harmonised framework for the civil enforcement of
intellectual property rights, including copyright and related
rights. The Commission has consulted broadly on this text65

You will find more information on the following
website:http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/iprenforcement/directive/index_en.htm

. Concerns have been raised as to whether some of its provisions
are still fit to ensure a proper respectforcopyright in the
digital age. On the one hand, the current measures seem to be
insufficient to deal with the new challenges brought by the
dissemination of digital content on the internet; on the other
hand, there are concerns about the current balance between
enforcement of copyright and the protection of fundamental
rights, in particular the right for a private life and data
protection. While it cannot be contested that enforcement
measures should always be available in caseofinfringement of
copyright, measures could be proposed to strengthen respect for
copyright when the infringedcontent is used for a commercial
purpose66

For example when the infringing content is offered on a website
which gets advertising revenues that depend on the volume of
traffic.

. One means to do this could be to clarify the role of
intermediaries in the IP infrastructure67

This clarification should not affect the liability regime of
intermediary service providers established by Directive
2000/31/EC on electronic commerce, which will remain unchanged.

. At the same time,there could beclarification of the
safeguardsforrespect of private life and data protection for
private users.

Should the civil enforcement system in the EU be rendered more
efficient for infringements of copyright committed with a
commercial purpose?

YES – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO OPINION

In particular, is the current legal framework clear enough to
allow forsufficient involvement of intermediaries (such as
Internet service providers, advertising brokers, payment
service providers, domain name registrars, etc.) in inhibiting
online copyright infringements with a commercial purpose? If
not, whatmeasureswould be useful to foster the cooperation of
intermediaries?

[Open question]

Het huidige kader volstaat.

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Does the current civil enforcement framework ensure that the
right balance is achieved between the right to have one’s
copyright respected and other rights such as the
protectionofprivate life and protection of personal data?

YES – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO – Please explain

Neen, er is een onevenwicht ten voordele van de
rechthebbenden.Slachtoffersvan inbreukenopintellectuele
eigendomsrechten krijgen meer mogelijkheden dan slachtoffers
van andere inbreuken (zoals verkeersongevallen,
milieuongevallen etc.). Bovendien wordtvaak te weinigrekening
gehoudenin dit alles met de bescherming van depersoonlijke
levenssfeer.

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO OPINION

AsingleEU CopyrightTitle

The idea of establishing aunifiedEU CopyrightTitlehas
beenpresent in the copyright debate for quite some time
now,although views as to the merits andthefeasibility of suchan
objectiveare divided.Aunified EUCopyrightTitlewouldtotally
harmonise the area of copyright law in the EU and replace
national laws. There would then be a single EU title instead of
a bundle of national rights.Some seethisas the only manner in
which a truly Single Market for content protected by copyright
can be ensured,whileothersbelieve that the same
objectivecanbetterbe achieved by establishing a higher level of
harmonisation while allowing for a certain degree of flexibility
and specificity in Member States’legal systems.

ShouldtheEU pursue the establishment of asingle
EUCopyrightTitle,as a means of establishing a consistent
framework for rights and exceptions to copyright across the EU,
as well as a single framework for enforcement?

YES

NO

NO OPINION

Should this be the next step in the development of copyright in
the EU? Does the current level of difference among the Member
State legislation mean that this is a longer term project?

[Open question]

Een EU-auteursrecht kan snel worden gerealiseerd. Hiervoor kan
het European Copyright Code van het Wittem project als basis
dienen

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Other issues

The above questionnaire aimstoprovidea comprehensive
consultation on the most important matters relating to the
current EU legal framework for copyright.Shouldany important
matters have been omitted,we would appreciate if you could
bring them to our attention, so they can be properly addressed
in the future.

Are there any other important matters related to the EU legal
framework for copyright? Please explain and indicate how such
matters should be addressed.

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

