
Point 2

In the past I used to exploit "myspace.com" for advertising my ensemble as
well as my musical compositions for my interlocutors’ reference.

However, one year ago, when I was updating my files, the web page imposed
my consensus to authorise MySpace to export my music in the USA, in the
opposite case my web page would have been deleted.

Fearing an eventual loss of my rights properties, I cancelled any of my
contents in such a space. Strangely, this took place in the same period the
EU was negotiating with a USA delegation about artistic Copyrights.

I hope the EU would take any initiative to safeguard the European culture
and artistic creativeness, mainly in the present period in which artistic
and musical creation and development is not strongly supported and promoted
by most of the European States, as well as by the EU, which is quite
regrettable, considering USA continues to promote its own music in the EU.

Point 14

Copyright has three main objectives: Social, Economic and Cultural : 1-
respect towards the Author of the content; 2- create a redistribution of
wealth; 3 - stimulate creativeness.
For example, in the decades 1950s-1970s, artistic compositions  (music,
films, theatre plays, and poetry) knew a great impulse stimulated by
European Governments, with the awareness that the post-war socioeconomic
situation needed to be motivated. It was usual to hear people whistling or
singing in the streets or on work (social repercussion) ;

Most of the people used to buy the last successes on a single record.
Without internet, such sales were representing a great wealth
redistribution and supported partially the economic recovery (economic
repercussions);

Through  the single or long playing record, composers as well as authors
were stimulated through copyrights  royalties to improve their artistic
competencies and was also a stimuli for the new generation to pursue their
innovation spirit of creativity.

Through free downloads, these repercussions are not anymore possible,
causing a slowdown of stimuli and interest for the artistic sphere.

Considering MIDI “music” – sorry for the quotation marks – has originated a
deterioration in music public performance with a single orchestra CD-Man,
the adoption of royalties payment for any MIDI music download, would push
new generation, who thinks they could “play music” without efforts nor
sacrifices, to start again to study seriously music and creating a musical
group as it is the norm.

Seeming initially a factor of secondary importance, we could in fine
realize that copyright royalties has a great influence on the above
mentioned phenomenon, through appropriate policies.



Point 16

This would help to sustain a EU integration system, within the artistic
sphere. Any specific advantages are already expressed under the above
points 2 and 14.

Point 18

One solutions could be the creation of a webpage with a DataBase related to
European artists, split under the different professional and artistic
vocation. This DB could eventually be created through information from
National associations for the protection of copyrights.  Then, due
information will be sent to the artists who will have to record themselves
in this huge European DB.



Point 19

It has been partially expressed under the above point 14, even a serious
organisation deriving from a serious policy of European artistic sector
development and protection will be needed.



Point 20

They should be strenghtened to help in developing the processes explained
above



Point 21

If we are talking about a directive, it's a bit suspicious to understand
why the could be optional for the Member States. This is, in my opinion,
the main reason why most directives, in any field of policies lead to a
loss of dynamism and a stagnant activity

Point 22

As mentioned under point 21

Point 24

This would inhibit the original objectives mentioned previously.



Point 25

There are, in many other fields too much exceptions in the application of
policies causing a dynamism slowdown of the EU and 28 nations need a more
rigid directives to apply, to avoid the deceiving results we noticed up
today.

Point 26

YES

If we are talking within the EU borders

NO

If these should apply outside EU borders, still maintaining a great
attention to copyright safeguard.

Point 27

I think National European associations for the protection of copyrights
should be the first involved in the question. This should also be valid for
the hereunder questions related to other sectors of activity.

Point 29

Through a EU agency responsible for European Copyrights.



Point 30

Before answering to this question It would be appropriate to verify first
the interest level expressed by the EU parliament.



Point 62

As already expressed this is a question of EU political willingness

Point 64

I think this should follow the same principles as the previous points

Point 67

YES
As explained previously

Point 72

By selling, for example, through the European Agency for Copyrights
royalties the work (book, video, music, music sheet, poem, etc).

Point 73

Any clauses which does not reflect the EU directives and specifications
expressed online for the work.



Point 75

Already explained under point 14.



Point 79

Yes, it should. There is the need to provide for an acceleration to the
solving of some hot questions such as copyright protection which is a
question dragging since too long time.



markt-copyright-consultation@ec.europa.eu

