


11. Should the provision of a hyperlink leading to a work or
other subject matter protected under copyright, either in
general or under specific circumstances, be subject to
theauthorisation of the rightholder?

No. 'Linking' is fundamental to the way people use and
experience the Internet. The ability to freely share links is
also a factor behind the Internet's usefulness as a driver of
economic growth and innovation and tool forsocial change.
Sharing links helps people create a map of what is important to
them.

Requiring permission to share links would undermine an important
principle behind the Internet's success – the idea that people
have more of a say over what is important– and render the
Internet less useful and, potentially, less easy to use. Of
course the recent Svensson case, for which a judgment at the
CJEU was handed down on 13thFebruary, is of crucial importance
to this
debate.http://www.twobirds.com/en/news/articles/2014/global/cjeu-decision-in-svensson-hyperlinks-to-freely-available-content

In general the permissions related to the presentation of
copyrighted work online should be settled further upstream – by
those creating websites, not when somebody is sharinginformation
about where to find that site and the content on it.

 

12. Should the viewing of a web-page where this implies the
temporary reproduction of a work or other subject matter
protected under copyright on the screen and in the cache memory
of the user’s computer, either in general or under specific
circumstances, be subject to the authorisation of the
rightholder?

 No.

We note the judgment from April 2013 of the UK Supreme Court,
who were asked to look at whether the temporary copies made for
browsing are covered by copyright. Graham Smith, a partner at
law firm Bird & Bird, summarised the judgment:

“Lord Sumption, who gave the judgment of the UKSC, concluded
that browsing did fall within the exception, and so did not
require the permission of the copyright owner. However he
recognised that the issue has a transnational dimension and has
important implications for many millions of people across the EU
making use of the internet. That made it desirable that the
decision be referred to the CJEU, so thatthe critical point
might be resolved in a manner that would apply uniformly across
the EU.”

The Supreme Court judgment is available
online.http://www.bailii.org/uk/cases/UKSC/2013/18.html

The CJEU reference is also available
onlinehttp://curia.europa.eu/juris/document/document.jsf?text=&docid=140431&pageIndex=0&doclang=en&mode=lst&dir=&occ=first&part=1&cid=312377

14. [In particular if you are a right holder or a service
provider:] What would be the consequences of providing a legal
framework enablingthe resale of previously purchased digital
content? Please specify per market (type of content) concerned.

Our concerns related to this are more broadly about ownership of
digital copyrighted works.

Restrictions are often placed on digital copies of copyrighted
works which limit how consumers can use their copies. This may
stop them doing things they would consider legitimate use of
physical copies – such as lending a book, or leaving their CD
collection or library of books in a will.

There is also a related labelling problem. If there are
significant limits on the use of works purchased – for example
where films can be removed from users' cloud libraries when
rights lapse - perhaps the words 'purchase' or 'buy' are
inappropriate and should be discouraged in favour of 'lease' or
'extended rental'.

19. What should be the role of the EU in promoting the adoption
of identifiers in the content sector, and in promoting the
development and interoperability of rights ownership and
permissions databases?

The EUshould be concerned about ensuring that rights ownership
and permissions databases are built around open standards. They
should be publicly accessible, machine readable and searchable.

 

20. Are the current terms of copyright protection still
appropriate in the digital environment?

For this question we draw on what we wrote in 2011, at the time
that term extension was back before the European Council.

Leading IP professors, the UK Government's 'Gowers Review' of
IP, and independent economic analysts all argued that extending
copyright term was unwise. The Financial Times labelled the
proposal 'disgraceful' in an editorial
(http://www.ft.com/cms/s/0/f435f4d4-2d09-11de-8710-00144feabdc0.html)
in 2009.

In their 2009 study on the value of the public domain, Rufus
Pollock, Paul Stepan and Mikko V alim aki argued that term
extension would likely result ultimately in higher prices for
consumers
(http://rufuspollock.org/papers/value_of_the_public_domain_eu.pdf).

 Longer copyright terms tend to benefit only a small number of
artists and businesses - according to a joint academic
statement, signed by 80 eminent academics, includingseveral
Nobel Laureates, 96% of the economic returns will go to the
major record labels and top 20% of performers
(http://www.cippm.org.uk/downloads/Term%20Statement%2027_10_08.pdf).
In an open letter in April 2011, four leading IP professors
argued that '….if there was a policy designed to suppress
social and commercial innovation, retrospective term extension
would be your choice.'
(http://www.cippm.org.uk/copyright_term.html)

On copyright term, policy makers should focus on helping provide
opportunity to recoup investment in creative production, putting
the artist in a strong position in relation to intermediaries
involved in financing or distributing their work, and promoting
the value of the public domain as a means of ensuring our
cultural heritage is accessible to the public. We believe that
suggests a shorter term with revocation of rights to the
creator after ashort period on a ‘use it or lose it’ basis.

 

21. Are there problems arising from the fact that most
limitations and exceptions provided in the EU copyright
directives are optional for the Member States?

We believe that exceptions and limitations as a useful way to
help people get the most out of copyrighted works. Exceptions
are helpful in defining what counts as legitimate use of a
copyrighted work, and setting out the limited instances in
which permission from or payment to the rightsholder should
notbe required.

For instance, a parody exception helps more people be creative
through their reworking of cultural works but, the evidence
suggests, does not adversely affect rightsholders' interests.

At the moment, people across Europe face a fairly disjointed
regime, with different jurisdictions enacting different
combinations of exceptions. That creates a confusing picture
for both consumers and, potentially, those looking to offer
services based on the sharing of user generated content. A more
consistent approach would likely help with this.

22. Should some/all of the exceptions be made mandatory and, if
so, is there a need for a higher level of harmonisation of such
exceptions?

As noted, there is certainly a patchwork of approaches at the
moment. We suggest that all exceptions in the Information
Society Directive 2001/29/EC and other Directives in the
copyright acquis be implemented as a minimum across the EU.

23. Should any new limitations and exceptions be added to or
removed from the existing catalogue? Please explain by
referring to specific cases.

A simple mechanism for adding or amending exceptions would be
extremely useful,helping copyright more dynamically keep pace
with technology.

We would support an exception for text and data mining, and a
parallel exception to the database right (requiring a small
amendment to Article 9 of the Database Directive). It should be
made explicit that “illustration for research” also includes
research carried out by means of data analytics.

From an educational perspective, we would also support an
exception allowing the recording of broadcasts and also the
communication of those broadcasts through secure networks for
educational purposes. Contract terms and technical protection
measures should not be able to overridethese exceptions.

In general we believe that contract should not override
exceptions.

 

62. If your view is that a legislative solution is needed, what
would be its main elements? Which activities should be covered
and under what conditions?

We support reforms that would allow people to remix copyrighted
works in ways that do not unduly interfere with the interests
of the rightsholder.

This is because we believe that allowing people to creatively
rework copyrighted goods would encourage people to be creative
citizens rather than just consumers, help people learn new
creative skills, and provide people more ways to be part of
cultural conversations happening around them. That is the
principle behind our support for a new copyright exception in
the UK for parody.

 

72. What is the best mechanism (or combination of mechanisms) to
ensure that you receive an adequate remuneration for the
exploitation of your works and performances?

Our response here draws on our submission to the UK IPO's 2013
consultation 'Copyright in the EU”. Our position is based in
our interest in seeing new technology help citizens be creators
and participants in culture, and on how markets for cultural
goods can function most effectively. We advocate for the
prioritisation of the perspective of creators' side of the
market, and an approach that tries to ensure everybody who
wishes to is able to play a more active role in culture and the
cultural economy.

We offer three suggestions here for focusing future work on the
position of the creator:

a. We support the work behind the recent report “Contractual
Arrangements Applicable to Creators”, published by the European
Parliament's Committee on Legal Affairs. We support the report's
recommendations such as mandatory 'use it or lose it' and
reversion clauses in contracts, dual licensing and for further
study on fair remuneration and competition law.

“Use it or lose it” clauses could help make sure that artists'
interests are served through ownership of copyright of their
works when exploitationof that work does not make economic
sense to the current rights holder. As the report notes, that
is especially likely to be a problem in digital markets in
which new distribution opportunities will emerge quickly.

We see a role for policy makers in pushing for more rights for
creators to seek the reversion of rights when material goes out
of commercial release.

b. We also support the report's recommendation that creators
need greater transparency, and specifically for mechanisms like
reporting obligations. The Commission should look at how they
can help creators get more information about how their works
are used and work with creators to look at where more
information about the use of their work would be useful. For
example, this could include guaranteesof raw listening data
from legal music services, such as streaming services.

c. Work to amend 'free and forever' clauses in social media end
user agreements.

As a continuation of this work, we suggest work to ensure that
terms of use for services we use to share content online such
as social networks are fair and equitable for all of us. That
would mean that when we share our photos, our words, and our
music it remains ours, to keep as private or public as we wish,
and remove if we decide to. For example,a simple approach would
be a Code of Conduct, which could at least help people
understand their privacy rights and copyright.

75. Should the civil enforcement system in the EU be rendered
more efficient for infringements of copyright committed with a
commercial purpose?

'Efficiency' should not mean 'speed' where that comes at the
expense of due process and the proper consideration of fairness
and justice in the enforcement of rights.

Copyright enforcement often involves the potential interference
with human rights such as freedom of expression and privacy.
One example of how interference with freedom of expression is
when intermediaries can or are pressured into making
unaccountable decisions about what people are allowed to
access, read or download online.

In such situations, policy makers should be concerned about who
is making an allegation of wrong-doing; who is checking that
allegation; how is that allegation proved; and can those
accused defend themselves or seek redress when mistakes are
made?

76.In particular, is the current legal framework clear enough to
allow for sufficient involvement of intermediaries (such as
Internet service providers, advertising brokers, payment
service providers, domain name registrars, etc.) in inhibiting
online copyright infringements with a commercial purpose? If
not, what measures would be useful to foster the cooperation of
intermediaries?

There are a number of issues policy makers must take account of
when looking to involve intermediaries further in the
enforcement of copyright. 'Foster cooperation' is an aim which
should be approached with great caution.

We do not support voluntary or co-regulatory process where no
court judgments are involved. Policy makers should avoid
creating enforcement regimes in which powers to decide what
people can see and do online, or to take action against alleged
infringers, can be exercised on the basis of unproven
allegations or insufficiently transparent legal processes. In
such situations, due process and rights of redress are absent
from measures such as blocking, or the taking down content, or
the suspension of domains.

Policy makers should promote the rule of law, due process and
rights of redress. We urge you to make sure that efforts to
enforce copyright build in respect for freedom of expression
and privacy from the start, and discourage the development of
less accountable voluntary enforcement measures.

77. Does the current civil enforcement framework ensure that the
right balance is achieved between the right to have
one’scopyright respected and other rights such as the
protection of private life and protection of personal data?

We are concerned at the tendency for voluntary or co-regulatory
arrangements to enforce copyright to ignore due process and a
respect forfundamental rights.

We are very concerned in general that policy makers do not
recognise how enforcement of copyright, especially when pursued
through voluntary arrangements, can undermine rights such as
freedom of expression and privacy. For example, in the UK a
voluntary letter writing scheme is being discussed as a
replacement for the Digital Economy Act. The UK Government is
encouraging and facilitating these discussions but they are
taking no responsibility for them. The discussions are taking
place between ISPs and rights holders. Without representatives
from organisations promoting consumer or human rights and
without the involvement of the government it is unclear who
will be ensuring that the policy works in the public interest.

To establish the best approach to tackling infringement, we
advocate policy makers adopting principles to be followed when
dealing with evidence from stakeholders, suchas:

 1. The methodology should be public, or at the very least
available to the policy makers to scrutinise. That will help
ensure that stakeholders can check the assumptions behind
research and the approaches taken to it.

2. The data upon which the findings are based should be public.
That would help to ensure that claims about what research
implies, or conclusions and recommendations drawn from the
data, can be checked and reviewed. Further, it could help more
people analyse findings and suggest future avenues for
research.

3. Treat research that does not adhere to principles 1 and 2
with scepticism. This will incentivise more stakeholders to
produce evidence that adheres with these principles.

