


Public Consultation

on the review of the EU copyright rules

Contents

I.  Introduction  2

A.  Context of the consultation  2

B.  How to submit replies to this questionnaire  3

C.  Confidentiality  3

II.  Rights and the functioning of the Single Market  7

A.  Why is it not possible to access many online content
services from anywhere in Europe?  7

B.  Is there a need for more clarity as regards the scope of
what needs to be authorised (or not) in digital transmissions?
10

1.  The act of “making available”  10

2.  Two rights involved in a single act of exploitation  11

3.  Linking and browsing  12

4.  Download to own digital content  13

C.  Registration of works and other subject matter – is it a
good idea?  14

D.  How to improve the use and interoperability of identifiers
15

E.  Term of protection – is it appropriate?  15

III.  Limitations and exceptions in the Single Market  16

A.  Access to content in libraries and archives  19

1.  Preservation and archiving  19

2.  Off-premises access to library collections  20

3.  E – lending  21

4.  Mass digitisation  22

B.  Teaching  23

C.  Research  25

D.  Disabilities  25

E.  Text and data mining  27

F.  User-generated content  28

IV.  Private copying and reprography  31

V.  Fair remuneration of authors and performers  33

VI.  Respect for rights  34

VII.  A single EU Copyright Title  36

VIII.  Other issues  36

Introduction

Context of the consultation

Over the last two decades, digital technology and the
Internethavereshaped the ways in which content is created,
distributed, and accessed.New opportunities have materialised
for those that create and produce content (e.g. a film, a
novel, a song),for new and existingdistribution platforms,for
institutions such as libraries, for activities such as research
and for citizens who now expect to be able to access content –
for information, education or entertainment purposes–regardless
of geographical borders.

This new environmentalso presentschallenges.One of themis for
the market tocontinue toadapt to new forms of distribution and
use.Another oneis for the legislator to ensure that the system
of rights, limitations to rights and enforcement
remainsappropriateand is adapted to the new environment.This
consultation focuses on the second of these challenges:
ensuring that the EU copyright regulatory frameworkstays fit
for purpose in the digital environmentto support creation and
innovation, tap the full potential of the Single
Market,fostergrowth andinvestment in our economy
andpromotecultural diversity.

In its"Communication on Content in the Digital Single Market"1

COM (2012)789 final, 18/12/2012.

the Commission set out two parallel tracks of action:ontheone
hand, to complete its on-going effort to review and to
modernise the EU copyright legislative framework2

As announced in the Intellectual Property Strategy ' A single
market for Intellectual Property Rights: COM (2011)287 final,
24/05/2011.

3

"Based on market studies and impact assessment and legal
drafting work"as announced in the Communication (2012)789.

with a view to a decision in 2014 on whether to table
legislative reform proposals, andon the other, to facilitate
practical industry-led solutions through the stakeholder
dialogue"Licences for Europe"on issues on which rapid progress
was deemed necessary and possible.

The"Licences for Europe"process has been finalised now4

See the document “Licences for Europe – tem pledges to bring
more content
online”:http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/copyright/docs/licences-for-europe/131113_ten-pledges_en.pdf.

. The Commission welcomes the practical solutions stakeholders
have put forward in thiscontext and will monitor their
progress. Pledges have been made by stakeholders in all four
Working Groups (cross borderportability ofservices,
user-generated content,audiovisual andfilm heritageand text and
data mining). Taken together, the Commission expects these
pledgesto bea further step in making the user environment
easier in many different situations. The Commission also takes
note of the fact that two groups –user-generated content
andtext and data mining–did not reach consensus among
participating stakeholders on either the problems to be
addressed or on the results. Thediscussions andresults
of"Licences for Europe"will be also taken into account in the
context of the review of the legislative framework.

As part of thereview process, the Commission is now launching a
public consultation onissuesidentified in the Communication on
Content in the Digital Single Market, i.e.:"territoriality in
the Internal Market, harmonisation, limitations and exceptions
to copyright in the digital age; fragmentation of the EU
copyright market; and how to improve the effectiveness and
efficiency of enforcement while underpinning its legitimacy in
the wider context of copyright reform".As highlighted in the
October 2013 European CouncilConclusions5

EUCO 169/13, 24/25 October 2013.

"Providingdigital services andcontentacross the single market
requires the establishment of a copyright regime for the
digital age. The Commission will therefore complete its
on-going review of the EU copyright framework in spring 2014.
It is important to modernise Europe's copyright regime and
facilitate licensing, while ensuring a high level protection of
intellectual property rights and taking into account
culturaldiversity".

This consultationbuildson previous consultationsand public
hearings, in particularthose onthe"Green Paper on copyright in
the knowledge economy"6

COM(2008)
466/3,http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/copyright/copyright-infso/index_en.htm#maincontentSec2.

,the"Green Paper on the online distribution of audiovisual
works"7

COM(2011) 427
final,http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/consultations/2011/audiovisual_en.htm.

and"Content Online"8

http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/consultations/2009/content_online_en.htm.

. These consultationsprovidedvaluablefeedback from
stakeholderson a number of questions,on issues as diverse as
theterritorialityofcopyrightand possible ways to overcome
territoriality,exceptionsrelated to the online dissemination of
knowledge,and rightholders’remuneration, particularly in the
audiovisual sector.Views were expressed by stakeholders
representing all stages in the value chain, including right
holders, distributors, consumers, and academics. The questions
elicited widely diverging views on the best way to proceed.
The"Green Paper on Copyright in the Knowledge Economy"was
followed up by a Communication. The replies to the"Green Paper
on the online distribution of audiovisual works"have fed into
subsequent discussions on the Collective Rights Management
Directive and into the current review process.

How tosubmitreplies tothis questionnaire

You are kindly asked to send your repliesby5February2014inaMS
Word, PDForOpenDocumentformattothefollowinge-mailaddressof DG
Internal Market and
Services:markt-copyright-consultation@ec.europa.eu.Please note
that replies sentafterthat datewill not be taken into account.

This consultation is addressedto different categories of
stakeholders. To the extent possible, the questions indicate
the category/iesof respondents mostlikelyto be concernedby
them(annotation in brackets, before the actual question).
Respondentsshould nevertheless feel freeto reply to any/all of
the questions. Also, please note that,apart from the question
concerning the identification of the respondent, none of the
questions is obligatory.Replies containing answers only to part
of the questions will be also accepted.

You are requested toprovideyour answers
directlywithinthisconsultation document. For the“Yes/No/No
opinion”questionsplease put the selected answer
inboldandunderlineit so it is easy for us to see your
selection.

In your answers to the questions, you are invited to refer to
the situation in EUMember States.You are also invitedin
particularto indicate, where relevant, what would be the
impactof options you put forwardin terms of costs,
opportunities and revenues.

The public consultation is available in English.
Responsesmay,however,be sent in any of the 24officiallanguages
of the EU.

Confidentiality

The contributionsreceivedin this round of consultation as well
as asummary reportpresenting theresponsesin a statistical and
aggregated formwill be published on the website of DG MARKT.

Please note thatallcontributionsreceivedwill be
publishedtogether with the identity of the contributor, unless
the contributor objects tothepublication oftheirpersonal data
on the grounds that such publication would harm his or her
legitimate interests. In this case,the contributionwillbe
published in anonymous form upon the contributor's explicit
request. Otherwise the contribution will not be published nor
willits content bereflected in the summary report.

Pleaseread ourPrivacy statement.

Please identify yourself:

Name:

BLAUTÖNE das Tonstudio

Mariahilfer Strasse 51/2/1,1060 Wien

AUSTRIA

In the interests of transparency, organisations (including, for
example, NGOs, trade associations and commercial enterprises)
are invited to provide the public with relevant information
about themselves by registering in the Interest Representative
Register and subscribing to its Code of Conduct.

If you are a Registered organisation, please indicate your
Register ID number below. Your contribution will then be
considered as representingthe views of your organisation:

If your organisation is not registered, you have the opportunity
toregister now.Responses from organisations not registered will
be published separately.

If you would like to submit your reply on an anonymous basis
pleaseindicate it belowby underlining thefollowinganswer:

Yes, I would like to submit my reply on an anonymous basis

Type of respondent(Pleaseunderlinethe appropriate):

End user/consumer(e.g.internet user,reader, subscriberto musicor
audiovisualservice,
researcher,student)ORRepresentativeofendusers/consumers

for the purposes of this questionnaire normally referred to
in questions as"end users/consumers"

Institutional user(e.g. school,university,
researchcentre,library, archive)ORRepresentativeof
institutional users

for the purposes of this questionnaire normally referred to
in questions as"institutional users"

Author/PerformerORRepresentativeof authors/performers

Publisher/Producer/BroadcasterORRepresentative of
publishers/producers/broadcasters

the two above categoriesare,for the purposes of this
questionnaire, normally referred to in questions as"right
holders"

XIntermediary/Distributor/Other service provider(e.g.online
music or audiovisual service, games platform,social media,
search engine, ICT industry)ORRepresentative of
intermediaries/distributors/other service providers

for the purposes of this questionnaire normally referred to
in questionsas"service providers"

Collective Management Organisation

Public authority

Member State

Other(Please explain):

…

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Rights and the functioning of the Single Market

Why is it not possible to accessmanyonline content servicesfrom
anywhere in Europe?[Theterritorialscope of the rights involved
in digital transmissions and the segmentation of the market
through licensing agreements]

Holders of copyright and related rights –e.g. writers, singers,
musicians-do not enjoya singleprotection in the EU. Instead,
they are protected on the basis of a bundle of national rights
in each Member State. Those rights have been largely harmonised
by the existingEUDirectives. However,differences remain andthe
geographical scopeof the rightsis limited to the territory of
the Member State granting them.Copyright is thus territorial in
the sense that rights are acquired and enforced on a
country-by-country basis under national law9

This principle has been confirmed by the Court of justice on
several occasions.

.

The dissemination of copyright-protected content on the Internet
–e.g. by a music streaming service,orbyanonline e-book
seller–thereforerequires, in principle,an authorisation for
each national territory in which the content is communicatedto
the public. Rightholdersare, of course,in a position togranta
multi-territorial or pan-Europeanlicence, such thatcontent
services can be provided in several Member States and across
borders.A number of stepshave beentaken at EU level to
facilitate multi-territoriallicences: the proposal for a
Directive on Collective Rights Management10

Proposalfor a Directiveof the European Parliament and of the
Councilof 11 July 2012 on collective management of copyright
and related rights and multi-territorial licensing of rights in
musical works for online uses in the internal market, COM(2012)
372 final.

should significantly facilitate the delivery of
multi-territorial licences in musical worksfor online
services11

CollectiveManagementOrganisations play a significant role inthe
management of online rights for musical works in contrastto
thesituation where online rights are licenseddirectly by right
holders such asfilm or record producers or by newspaper or book
publishers.

;thestructured stakeholder dialogue “Licences for Europe”12

You can find more information on the following website:
http://ec.europa.eu/licences-for-europe-dialogue/.

and market-led developments such as the on-going work in the
Linked Content Coalition13

You can find more information on the following
website:http://www.linkedcontentcoalition.org/.

.

"Licences for Europe" addressed in particular the specific issue
of cross-border portability, i.e. the ability of consumers
having subscribed to online services in their Member State to
keep accessing them when travelling temporarily to other Member
States. As a result, representatives of the audio-visual sector
issued a joint statement affirming their commitment to continue
working towards the further development of cross-border
portability14

See the document “Licences for Europe – tem pledges to bring
more content
online”:http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/copyright/docs/licences-for-europe/131113_ten-pledges_en.pdf.

.

Despite progress, there are continued problems
withthecross-borderprovisionof, and access to, services. These
problems are most obviousto consumerswanting to access
servicesthatare madeavailable in Member Statesother than the
one in which they live.Not all online services are available in
all Member States and consumers face problems when trying
to access such services across borders. In some instances,
even if the“same”service is available in all Member States,
consumerscannotaccess theservice across borders (they can
onlyaccess their“national” service, and if they try to
accessthe "same" servicein another Member State they are
redirected to theonedesignatedfortheir country of residence).

Thissituationmayin part stem from the territoriality of
rightsand difficulties associated with the clearing of rights
in different territories.Contractual clauses in licensing
agreements between rightholders and distributors and/or between
distributors and end users mayalsobe at the origin of some of
the problems (denial of access, redirection).

The main issueat stake hereis,therefore,whether furthermeasures
(legislative or non-legislative, including market-led
solutions)need tobe taken at EU level in the medium term15

For possible long term measures such as the establishment of
aEuropean Copyright Code(establishinga single title) see
section VII of this consultation document.

to increase the cross-border availability of content services in
the Single Market,while ensuring an adequate level of
protectionfor right holders.

[In particular if you arean enduser/consumer:]Have you faced
problems whentryingto access online services in an EU Member
State other than the one in which you live?

YES - Please provide examples indicating the Member State,
the sector and the type of content concerned (e.g. premium
content such as certain films and TV series, audio-visual
content in general, music, e-books, magazines, journals and
newspapers, games, applications and other software)

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

xNO

There are sufficient platforms throughout Europe - nationally
and internationally. The market continually discovers solutions
to supply consumers with content everywhere and across all
devices and platforms. This is evidenced by 3,000 online
services and annual growth rates.

By now, Europe can boast more than 3,000 online services, some
of them international, but many also regional, since the
interests of consumers still primarily have a national focus.
No doubt there are a number of geo-tagged online services,
which can only be received in an area with a specific
nationality or language (Austria/Germany). But this is not at
all exclusively related to rights acquisition problems but due
to other weighty reasons. Ignoring diverging legal provisions,
such as: provisions under youth protection laws or
administrative access provisions under telecommunications laws,
which make market entry less attractive, online markets still
have development potential. Online platforms generally first
try to establish themselves on their domestic market before
expanding to neighbouring/other territories. Even major
financially strong platforms like Netflix do not try to expand
worldwide but strategically in the relevant target markets.
Especially the expansion strategy of Netflix is an example
demonstrating that it is not difficult licensing which prevents
multiterritorial expansion - as claimed - but weighty corporate
strategy reasons.

In addition, difficulties in terms of accessing online services
across borders are also technical and must thus also be viewed
in relation to the internet service providers themselves.
Technical problems and high roaming costs constitute an
economic barrier, which is far more significant than the often
asserted licensing difficulties. Moreover, there are strong
regional differences, such as broadband infrastructure,
broadband speed, number systems and legal barriers not relating
to copyright.

Experiences from the point of view of a producer have shown that
any barriers to creating an EU-wide presence rarely relate to
license or copyright issues. Such resistances often also result
from the rich cultural and linguistic diversity within Europe,
which the EU Commission should actually also view as positive
in terms of their obligations under the UNESCO convention on
cultural diversity (Comment: Its positive attitude must
unfortunately be questioned, however, since the fragmentation
of the market is underlined as a "disadvantage" in nearly every
EU paper).

As an Austrian example, we can point out that the Austrian
Association of Film Producers (Verwertungsgesellschaft der
Filmproduzenten) and the Austrian Film Industry Association
(Verband der Filmwirtschaft Österreichs) have recently started
a sponsorship campaign in order to support the repertoire of
Austrian films online and to support film producers in covering
the costs required to license repertoire films ex post and to
make them online compatible. This creates a major incentive,
and in 2014, a large part of the relevant Austrian repertoire
will be available on the different platforms online - both
nationally and across borders.

There is no doubt that the companies of the film industry are
taking every opportunity to offer their film productions in all
exploitations - and of course also online and across borders.
The fact that in 2012, the digital online video market
increased by 97% demonstrates that this opportunity is not only
available, but that it has also been accepted by consumers.
Nevertheless, there is no point in keeping secret that the
increases on the digital market are in no way able to
compensate for the reductions in the physical market. The
reasons for this are no doubt complex and less to do with film
exploitation policies, and more with the at times extant market
power of market participants in the online sector, and the
ongoing competition from illegal platforms. In 2012, the
international video market comprised approx. € 3,600 million,
whereas consumer online spending only reached approx. € 673
million. These differences also show that, in spite of
impressive percentage increases, the economic effect of the
online market is currently being overestimated. However, these
reductions particularly impact on the options of the film
industry to develop and produce its (expensive) product
'Theatrical and TV film'. Public funds reach their limits for
obvious reasons. The new players on the online market do not
finance films, or only to an insufficient extent - among other
reasons because they have no obligation to do so, in contrast
with other "conservative" media. Furthermore, the new media
split also has negative effects on income from distribution and
publishing activities.

NO OPINION

[In particular if you area service provider:]Have you faced
problems when seeking to provide online services across
bordersin the EU?

YES - Please explain whether such problems, in your
experience, are related to copyright or to other issues (e.g.
business decisions relating to the cost of providing services
across borders, compliance with other laws such as consumer
protection)? Please provide examples indicating the Member
State, the sector and the type of content concerned (e.g.
premium content such as certain films and TV series,
audio-visual content in general, music, e-books, magazines,
journals and newspapers, games, applications and other
software).

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

xNO

The problems do not relate to licensing law. Sustainable
consumer demand for online services across borders has not been
shown.Providers wanting to offer online services have access to
sufficient tools to acquire the rights.

In truth, studies so far have also been unable to provide
evidence for sustainable consumer demand for online services
across borders. The number of existing online platforms and
growth rates shown that consumers request content on a national
level, but cross-border demand is currently still a claim. Even
in the case of the two German-speaking markets of Austria and
Germany, many existing platforms are only available in the
relevant country, which is also to do with the fact that online
acceptance and economic income is already relatively low
nationally.Support from the Professional Association and the
Association for Audio-Visual Media (VAM) to achieve visibility
for the Austrian repertoire will already result in a
significant qualitative and quantitative quantum leap in
2014.Even Netflix does not simply trade across borders, after
all, but consciously chooses its target markets in the
knowledge that AV content will often also have to be
"configured" for the relevant target country. For instance, for
distribution reasons, theatrical films might have different
titles or cuts even in the same cultural circles, and even
between Austria and Germany.

As mentioned above, rights clearance in the B2B area is possible
without problems. In countries where collecting societies
represent the global repertoire for their relevant rights on a
legal basis (Austria), rights clearance is also easy
practically. The criticisms voiced by user platforms are in
fact not about legal difficulties in setting up or obtaining
licenses but about the amounts payable for license fees and the
need to hold individual negotiations.
For instance, the fact that many German online services provide
no access in Austria is not related to rights clearance but to
the differences between the various legal provisions for
permits etc. mentioned above. In addition, it also is due to
the fact that even in the larger domestic (=German) market,
these online services are not sufficiently financially secured
to allow for expansion.
Even the explicit question why there appears to be no interest
in the Austrian market was answered primarily by stating that
the Austrian market tended to be too small to technically
arrange a specific market expansion.

License problems were in fact never (!) mentioned as a reason
why VOD or streaming services are not offered across borders.
In many cases, the rights to theatrical films are offered as
global distributor packages, which would make them easily
available e.g. for the larger German-speaking area.

NO OPINION

[In particular if you area right holder or acollective
management organisation:]Howoftenare youaskedtogrant
multi-territorial licences?Pleaseindicate, if possible, the
number of requests per yearand provide examples indicating the
Member State, the sector and the type of content concerned.

[Open question]

Currently, no demand for multiterritorial licenses could be
identified. Language areas are significant.

Practically, multiterritorial licenses are in fact assigned
quite often, in such a way that global distributors or also
national distributors obtain a rights package that includes
online rights. As a result, producers have an interest in
ensuring that the global distributor uses these rights in
multiple territories, if possible. However, the current system
of course differs from the EU-multiterritorial license system
in that global distributors in turn tend to re-assign rights
packages for territories, even if the overall economic effect
must be viewed as multiterritorial.

In the online area, different business models are likely to have
become established, so that in practice, film producers often
take online rights from their global distribution packages and
assign them separately. We do not know to what extent this is
done for several territories; whenever films are assigned to
international platforms, such as iTunes, licenses are
multiterritorial anyway, or at least language area licenses.
Overall, we can say that there currently appears to be little
demand for multiterritorial, cross-border licenses. Language
areas are significant here, but there seems to be only a
limited exchange even between the German-speaking neighbouring
countries of Austria and Germany. The development is no doubt
moving towards offering content at least within a language
area, but the market is not fully developed yet and parts of
audiovisual products are still strongly regional. This is also
particularly the case for TV content. Danish or British series,
such as "Borgen", the Mankell series or "The Killing" are more
of an exception that proves the rule. Generally, TV series,
with the exception of those mentioned above and the US top
repertoire, still have a strong regional focus, and persist on
the basis of nationally well-known presenters and actors and of
the regional environment. In the end, audience acceptance and
the regional and cultural approach are of key importance.
Normally, even online platforms only expand outside their
territory once the region has been secured as sustainable
economic.

If you have identified problems in the answers to any of the
questions above – what would be the bestway to tacklethem?

[Open question]

The best way is still to let the industry choose its
exploitations. It is not only best at this, but it is also in
its own interest to use every type of exploitation so long as
it is economically sustainable.

The EU has initiated the process "Licenses for Europe" and has
demonstrated that industry- and market-led solutions, and
offering support for them, is the best way to meet consumer
demand.

[In particular if you area right holder or acollective
management organisation:]Are there reasons why, evenin cases
where you holdall thenecessaryrights forall theterritoriesin
question,youwould still find it necessaryor justifiedto impose
territorial restrictions onaservice provider (in order, for
instance, to ensure that access to certain content is not
possible in certainEuropeancountries)?

xYES – Please explain by giving examples

"It's the economy, stupid" (Copyright Bill Clinton).

Technical or legal (but in no way exclusively copyright) reasons
might prevent a cross-border exploitation. But the main reason
so far is the lack of sustainable demand.

a) Divergent national legal provisions, such as youth
protection, registration duties and advertising bans, quotas.

b) Technical reasons/roaming costs.

c) Economic strategy reasons, e.g. focus on domestic market.

d) Extremely varied acceptance of online services in European
countries.

e) Different broadband penetration in Europe.

There are objective reasons why audiovisual content is licensed
for territories. In many cases - e.g. TV - the local audience
is the main recipient, both in terms of language and
culturally. It is a well-known fact revealed in all studies
that local audiences are first of all interested in national
content, then in (US) blockbuster content and only then in
non-national European content. This is a fact that even
artificial regulations cannot alter in the short term. Market
conditions and regulations are different from country to
country. Given the nature of audiovisual products, this cannot
be "unified from the top down", as is also true of many other
cultural products. Film defies standardisation and each work
must be viewed as a prototype - both in terms of the business
model for development, production and distribution and of the
intended target group.

NO

NO OPINION

[In particular if you aree.g. a broadcasterora service
provider:]Are there reasons why,evenin cases where you have
acquiredall thenecessaryrights for all the territoriesin
question,youwould still find it necessaryor justifiedto impose
territorial restrictions on the service recipient (in order for
instance, to redirect the consumer to a different website than
the one he is trying to access)?

xYES – Please explain by giving examples

"It's the economy, stupid" (Copyright Bill Clinton).

Technical or legal (but in no way exclusively copyright) reasons
might prevent a cross-border exploitation. But the main reason
so far is the lack of sustainable demand.

a) Interest of TV channel for first broadcasting rights

b) Restrictions for public channel online offers in order not to
discriminate against private online providers

c) Decisions about co-producing channels and/or co-producing
producers regarding economically sensible exploitation

d) Different exploitation windows

e) Market reasons!

f) Higher costs of rights acquisition: Even for products focused
on the regional market, acquiring a multiterritorial license
would increase costs and thus make the de facto attractive
content unattractive, as too expensive.

 NO

 NO OPINION

Do you think that further measures (legislative or
non-legislative, including market-led solutions) are needed at
EU level to increase the cross-border availability of content
services in the Single Market, while ensuring an adequate level
ofprotection for right holders?

YES – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

xNO– Please explain

Legislative measures are not necessary or even
counter-productive. The market and contractual freedom provide
the answer.

Since there is no conclusive evidence for a market failure,
there is also no justification for legislative interventions.
Contractual freedom and the interest of the audiovisual
industry in extensive exploitation of their products do not
require this. Influencing business models with regulations
tends to have a counter-productive effect, might even raise
licensing costs for some products not suited to
multiterritorial exploitation and as a result might be entirely
counter-productive from a cultural and economic perspective. The
world of media is undoubtedly undergoing a change! The industry
is therefore needed more than ever and also able to perpetually
and dynamically adapt to this changed market environment. It is
certainly better suited to this than any kind of legislating
organisation on a national or supranational level.

However, suggestions on the part of the industry are:

a) More initiatives for market-led solutions

b) Financial support, such as Media

c) European quota for (including foreign) online platforms to be
taken seriously

d) Financial support to create European or regional online
initiatives and national platforms for national AV content
(e.g. France's Univercine; Netherlands).

NO OPINION

Is there a need for more clarityas regardsthe scope ofwhat needs
to be authorised (or not) in digital transmissions?[The
definition of the rightsinvolved in digital transmissions]

The EU framework for the protection of copyright and related
rights in the digital environment is largely established by
Directive 2001/29/EC16

Directive 2001/29/EC of the European Parliament and of the
Council of 22 May 2001 on the harmonisation of certain aspects
of copyright and related rights in the information society.

on the harmonisation of certain aspects of copyright and related
rights in the information society. OtherEUdirectives in this
fieldthatare relevant in the online environment are those
relating to the protection of software17

Directive 2009/24/EC of the European Parliament and of the
Council of 23 April 2009 on the legal protection of computer
programs.

and databases18

Directive 96/9/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council
of 11 March 1996 on the legal protection of databases.

.

Directive 2001/29/ECharmonisestherights of authors and
neighbouring rightholders19

Film and record producers, performers and broadcasters are
holders of so-called “neighbouring rights” in, respectively,
their films, records, performances and broadcast. Authors’
content protected by copyright is referred to as a “work” or
“works”, while content protected by neighbouring rights is
referred to as “other subject matter”.

which are essential for thetransmission of digital copiesof
works(e.g. an e-book)and other protected subject matter(e.g. a
record in a MP3 format)over the internetor similar digital
networks.

The mostrelevantrightsfor digital transmissionsarethe
reproduction right, i.e. the right to authorise or prohibit the
making of copies20

The right to “authorise or prohibit direct or indirect,
temporary or permanent reproduction by any means and in any
form, in whole or in part” (see Art. 2 of Directive 2001/29/EC)
although temporary acts of reproduction of a transient or
incidental nature are, under certain conditions, excluded (see
art. 5(1) of Directive 2001/29/EC).

,(notablyrelevant at the start of the transmission –e.g. the
uploading ofadigital copy of a work to a serverin view ofmaking
it available–and at the users’ end– e.g. when a user downloads
a digital copy of a work)and the communication to the
public/making available right, i.e. the rights to authorise or
prohibit the dissemination of the works in digital networks21

The right to authorise or prohibit any communication to the
public by wire or wireless means and to authorise or prohibit
the making available to the public “on demand” (seeArt. 3 of
Directive 2001/29/EC).

.These rightsare intrinsically linked in digital
transmissionsandboth need to be cleared.

Theact of“making available”

Directive 2001/29/EC specifiesneitherwhatis covered bythe making
available right(e.g. the upload,the accessibility by the
public,theactualreception by the public)norwherethe act of
“making available” takes place. This does not raise
questionsif the act is limited to a single territory.
Questionsarise however when the transmission covers several
territories and rights need to be cleared (does the act of
"making available" happeninthe country of the upload only?in
each of the countries where the content is potentially
accessible?in each of the countries where thecontent
iseffectivelyaccessed?).The most recent case law of the Court
of Justice of the European Union (CJEU)suggests that a relevant
criterion is the“targeting” of a certainMember State'spublic22

See in particularCase C-173/11(Football Dataco vs Sportradar)
andCase C-5/11 (Donner) for copyright and related rights, and
Case C-324/09 (L’Oréal vs eBay) for trademarks. With regard to
jurisdiction seealso joined Cases C-585/08 and C-144/09 (Pammer
and Hotel Alpenhof)andpending CaseC-441/13 (Pez Hejduk);
seehowever,adopting a different approach, CaseC-170/12
(Pinckney vs KDG Mediatech).

. According to this approachthecopyright-relevantact(whichhas
tobe licensed)occursat leastin those countries which are
“targeted” by the online service provider.A service provider
“targets” a group of customers residing in a specific country
when it directsits activity to that group, e.g. via
advertisement, promotions, a language or a currency
specifically targeted at that group.

Isthe scope of the“making available”right in cross-border
situations – i.e. when content is disseminated across borders
–sufficiently clear?

xYES

"Making available" rights are documented in the judiciary and
legislature! Particularly the InfoSoc Guideline 2001/29 and the
current jurisprudence of the Court of Justice of the European
Union sufficiently define the area of "making available"
rights. No further definition is required!

The jurisprudence of the Court of Justice of the European Union
has defined the "making available" right sufficiently clearly,
and there is also no lack of clarity in the cross-border area.
The exclusive "making available" right as implemented in the
WIPO Copyright Treaty and in the EU copyright directive is
defined in this sufficiently regarding streaming or downloading
and explicitly focuses on the interactive and time-independent
use of goods protected by copyright. The MA-right is based on
the interactive nature of the right and offers the necessary
room for interpretation. The latter is the competence of the
ECJ. In contrast to the satellite law, the MA-right not only
covers actions in the country of origin, but - consistently
following the international focus of the internet - wherever
consumer access could impact on the right holder's sphere of
rights.

NO–Pleaseexplain how this could be clarified and what
typeofclarification would be required(e.g.as in "targeting"
approach explained above,as in "country of origin"approach23

The objective of implementing a “country of origin”approachis to
localise the copyright relevant act that must be licenced in a
single Member State (the "country of origin", which could be
for example the Member State in whichthe content is uploaded or
wherethe service provider is established), regardless of in how
many Member States the work canbe accessed or received. Such an
approachhas already been introduced at EU level with regard to
broadcasting by satellite(seeDirective 93/83/EEC on the
coordination of certain rules concerning copyright and rights
related to copyright applicable to satellite broadcasting and
cable retransmission).

)

NO OPINION

[In particular if you are a right holder:]Coulda clarification
of the territorial scope of the“making available”right have
aneffect on therecognition of yourrights (e.g.whetheryou are
considered to be an author or not,whetheryou are considered to
have transferred your rights or not),onyourremuneration,
oronthe enforcement of rights(including the availability of
injunctive relief24

Injunctive relief is a temporary or permanent remedy allowing
the right holder to stop or prevent an infringement of his/her
right.

)?

YES –Please explain howsuchpotential effectscould beaddressed

xNO

A clarification limited the area of the exclusive "making
available" right is neither necessary nor justified.Anti-piracy
measures against services, which are often located abroad
(within the EU), would be put seriously at risk if they become
impossible to implement from those markets where the services
are received.

Wherever an economic possibility for income exists, copyright
exploitation is also relevant.
A clarification limited the area of the exclusive "making
available" right is neither necessary nor justified. In the
audiovisual sector, in contrast to other sectors, the rights
are bundled in the direction of the producer to enable project
development financing. Even though questions regarding the
"making available" right do not affect the relationship between
film makers and film producers, nor the right to exploit this
right, it is important for producers to continue to remain
entitled as part of their contractual freedom to authorise
exploitation of the audiovisual work. This also includes the
exploitation channels and the territorial scope of licensed
rights in order to optimally place audiovisual products on the
markets in the interest of the involved right holders and of
the individual work and to make them marketable. This legal
security is also required in the context of project development
and financial planning in order to be able to guarantee the
financing basis for the expensive cultural product 'Film' both
nationally and supranationally. A "country of origin" access
could seriously impact on the options of right holders to
enforce e.g. commercially trading websites in violation of
copyright, if these trade from other member states or - as is
normally the case - from outside the EU. Legal action against
the intermediaries (according to Section 8/3 of the Copyright
Directive) is often the only remaining option, which in legal
practice often faces not insubstantial barriers and political
resistance. Section 8/3 has by now become an important tool for
right holders in order to fight online copyright violations,
which is of course related to the fact that structurally
speaking, rights violators often trade from outside the EU.

NO OPINION

Two rights involved in a single act of exploitation

Each act oftransmission in digital networks entails(in the
current state of technology and law) several reproductions.This
means that there are two rights that apply to digital
transmissions: the reproduction right and the making available
right. Thismay complicate the licensing of works for online
usenotably whenthetwo rights are held bydifferent
persons/entities.

[In particular if youa service provider or a right holder:]Does
the application of two rights toa single act of economic
exploitation in the online environment (e.g. a download)create
problemsfor you?

YES – Please explainwhat type of measureswould be needed in
order to address such problems (e.g. facilitation of joint
licences when the rights are in different hands,legislation to
achieve the "bundling of rights")

xNO

Any legislative intervention, which hinders the contractual
freedom of the parties involved in terms of reproduction rights
or making available rights, can only be detrimental to further
development and is neither necessary nor justified.

In the B2B area, rights clearance is a banal activity and a
matter of course for anyone trading professionally. In reality,
other administrative acts are more complicated because in the
copyright area, the right holders tend to be known or the
rights exercised by collecting societies with a regional
monopoly. The only problems that interested buyers of rights
face are of course of a monetary nature, i.e. licensing costs.
Wherever collecting societies are responsible, they already act
as a de facto one-stop-shop on a territorial level.

After all, it is not an exception for several types of rights to
be required for exploitations in the copyright area. This tends
to be the norm: E.g. each music label naturally acquires
distribution, publication, reproduction and sync rights, and at
times also editing rights. The parallel nature of rights
acquisitions for different rights in one economically uniform
exploitation act is thus the norm.

On demand services generally also often require reproduction or
publication rights in addition to the "making available" right.
However, as we know, around 3,000 on demand services trade in
the EU and license audiovisual contents on a daily basis; as a
matter of course, these are treated in the same way in ordinary
business, even if one single economic exploitation act comprises
several rights. And this, quod erat demonstrandum, obviously
does not lead to problems. In the offline environment, it is of
course also normal for several rights to be traded side by side.
Any legislative intervention, which hinders the contractual
freedom of the parties involved in terms of reproduction rights
or making available rights, can only be detrimental to further
development and is neither necessary nor justified.

NO OPINION

Linking and browsing

Hyperlinks are references to data that lead a user from one
location in the Internet to another. They are indispensable for
the functioning of the Internet as a network. Severalcasesare
pending before the CJEU25

Cases C-466/12 (Svensson), C-348/13 (Bestwater International)
and C-279/13 (C More entertainment).

in which the question has been raised whether the provision of
a clickable link constitutes an act of communication to the
public/making available to the public subject to the
authorisation of the rightholder.

A user browsing the internet (e.g. viewing a web-page) regularly
creates temporary copies of works and other subject-matter
protected under copyright on the screen and in the 'cache'
memory of his computer. A question has been referred to the
CJEU26

Case C-360/13 (Public Relations Consultants Association Ltd).See
alsohttp://www.supremecourt.gov.uk/decided-cases/docs/UKSC_2011_0202_PressSummary.pdf.

as towhether such copies are always covered by the mandatory
exception for temporary acts of reproduction provided for in
Article 5(1) of Directive 2001/29/EC.

Should the provision of a hyperlink leading to a work or other
subject matter protected under copyright,either in generalor
under specific circumstances,besubject to the authorisation of
the rightholder?

xYES – Please explainwhether you consider this to be the case in
general,or under specificcircumstances,and why

Links leading to a work without any interim steps should also be
subject to an authorisation because calling up the link already
enables an economically relevant exploitation act so that as a
result, the link can be equated with a "usage act".Since users
obtain easier access to works through the link, the authors
should consistently authorise direct access to a work via
hyperlink and be able to share in remuneration.

Hyperlink is the generic term for different types of links.
Links leading to a work without any interim steps should also
be subject to an authorisation because calling up the link
already enables an economically relevant exploitation act so
that as a result, the link can be equated with an "act of use".
Copyright legislation and the jurisprudence of the European
Court of Justice have by now brought up clarity regarding
linking and browsing in numerous individual rulings.

Once more, hyperlinks play an important role in the context of
distributing audiovisual works online, and a general exclusion
of all types of hyperlinks from copyright protection would mean
that the previously existing contractual freedom between
exploiters and right holders would be hindered and above all
the ability of the right holder to counteract copyright
violations would be undermined. Additional legislative actions
are thus required because this allows the European Court of
Justice to properly respond to individual cases by providing
specific grounds. Given the multitude of possible link
functions to audiovisual content, it is therefore necessary to
assess each complex individual case.

NO – Please explainwhether you consider this to be the case
in general,or under specific circumstances,and why(e.g. because
it does not amount to an act of communication to the public – or
to a new public, or because it should be covered by a copyright
exception)

NO OPINION

Should the viewing of a web-pagewhere this impliesthetemporary
reproduction of a work or other subject matterprotected under
copyrighton the screen andin thecache memoryof the user’s
computer,either in general or under specific circumstances,be
subject to the authorisation of the rightholder?

xYES – Please explainwhether you consider this to be the case in
general,or under specific circumstances,and why

Here, the principle also applies that a legal exploitation act
can only stem from a legal source, which is effectively not the
case with illegal streaming sites. Practical significance is
low, however, since end consumers have de facto never been
prosecuted for streaming.

In practice, there have in any case never been examples in
Austria where legal claims were asserted against consumers
because they streamed content. Nevertheless, the principle also
applies that a legal exploitation act can only stem from a legal
source, which is effectively not the case with illegal streaming
sites (see the popular streaming platform kino.to). As a result,
the principle that any acts of use, which influence the economic
and personal rights-related exploitation sovereignty of the
author, should in any case be protected by copyright. There is
no doubt that the three-step test would rate the use of
audiovisual contents via streaming (= public performance) as
such a relevant act of use. It remains a question to what
extent this rating would result in actual legal consequences;
especially because consumption via streaming is in reality
difficult to prove and has therefore rarely led to legal action
in the past.

The present legal situation is clear, and jurisprudence is able
to define specific circumstances more clearly. Generally,
however, the exclusive reproduction right in Section 2 of the
copyright directive must be applied to “temporary
reproductions“, an interpretation, which the European Court
of Justice has now also confirmed (see ECJ premiere league
case). Apart from the rather insignificant practical
consequences of prosecuting consumers, any changes with regard
to prosecuting commercially trading online websites in
violation of copyright would have to be rejected. These in any
case generate profits illegally by stealing audiovisual
contents, and the prosecution of such sites (again see kino.to)
is a major concern for right holders.

NO – Please explainwhether you consider this to be the case
in general,or under specific circumstances,andwhy(e.g. because
it isor should be covered by a copyright exception)

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO OPINION

Download to own digital content

Digital content is increasinglybeing
boughtviadigitaltransmission(e.g. download to own). Questions
arise as to the possibility forusersto dispose of the filesthey
buy inthismanner(e.g. by selling themorby giving them as a
gift).Theprinciple of EU exhaustion of the distribution right
applies in the case of the distribution ofphysical copies (e.g.
when a tangible article such as a CD or a book, etc. is sold,
the right holder cannot preventthefurther distributionof that
tangible article)27

See also recital 28 of Directive 2001/29/EC.

. Theissuethat ariseshere is whether this principlecan also be
applied in the caseof an act of transmission equivalent in its
effect to distribution (i.e. where the buyer acquires the
property of the copy)28

In Case C-128/11 (Oracle vs. UsedSoft) the CJEU ruled that an
author cannot oppose the resale of a second-hand licence that
allows downloading his computer program from his website and
using it for an unlimited period of time. The exclusive right
of distribution of a copy of a computer program covered by such
a licence is exhausted on its first sale.While it is thus
admitted that the distribution right may be subject to
exhaustion in case of computer programs offered for download
with the right holder’s consent, the Court was careful to
emphasise that it reached this decision based on the Computer
Programs Directive. It was stressed that this exhaustion rule
constituted alex specialisin relation to the Information
Society Directive (UsedSoft, par. 51, 56).

.This raises difficultquestions, notably relating to the
practical application of such an approach (how to
avoidre-sellers keepingand usinga copy ofawork afterthey have
“re-sold” it– this is often referred to as the “forward and
delete” question) as well astotheeconomicimplications of the
creation of a second-hand market of copies of perfect quality
that never deteriorate(in contrast to the second-hand market
for physical goods).

[In particular if you arean enduser/consumer:]Haveyou
facedrestrictionswhen trying to reselldigital files that
youhavepurchased(e.g.mp3 file,e-book)?

YES–Please explainby giving examples

xNO

This has been clarified sufficiently and therefore does not
require further legislative action.

NO OPINION

[In particular if you area right holderor a service provider:]
What would betheconsequencesofproviding a legal framework
enabling the resale ofpreviouslypurchaseddigital content?
Please specify per market(type of content)concerned.

[Open question]

The exhaustion principle has been clarified sufficiently in EU
legislation and judicature, and has played an important role in
developing the EU market in terms of exploitation rights. In
terms of enforcement, an extension of the exhaustion principle
to digital content would be practically impossible to control
and would result in an approval of mass reproductions and of an
uncontrollable circulation of digital works.In addition, any
amendment would contradict InfoSoc RL (see rec.29).The software
decision of the ECJ regulates an entirely different area and
cannot be applied to AV content.

It must be stressed that, in contrast to the analogue
reproduction acts of the past (music tapes, videos), digital
copies are aclone of the original, which is of the same quality
and not subject to any further wear and tear. It is therefore
entirely unclear what happens to the original work on resale.
To be consistent, original users would presumably need to
destroy/delete it or make it unusable otherwise. But it is
precisely this feature of digital distribution, that the
original version continues to exist and the clone is
mass-reproduced, which would in reality make controlling an
extension of the exhaustion principle to digital content
entirely impossible to enforce. The result would then be an
approval of mass reproductions and of the free circulation of
digital works.

The exhaustion principle has been clarified sufficiently in EU
legislation and judicature, and has played an important role in
developing the EU market in terms of exploitation rights. If the
online market is truly to develop to the good of all
stakeholders involved, then right holders must retain the
option to license new business models in highly different ways.
In contrast to the analogue world, it is nearly impossible to
effectively check a transfer of digital contents in the digital
world, because it would be necessary to ensure that the
"original" of the copy sold is removed from exploitation; this
is impracticable.

Registration of works and
=========================

other subject matter – is it a good idea?

Registration is not often discussed in copyrightin the EUas the
existing internationaltreaties in the area prohibit formalities
as a condition for theprotection and exerciseofrights.
However,this prohibition is not absolute29

For example, it does not affect “domestic” works – i.e.works
originating inthe country imposing the formalitiesas opposed to
works originating inanothercountry.

.Moreover a system of registration does not need to bemade
compulsory or constitute a precondition for the protection and
exercise of rights.Witha longer term ofprotectionand with the
increased opportunities that digital technology
providesfortheuse of content(includingolder works and works
thatotherwisewouldnot havebeen disseminated),the advantages and
disadvantages of a system of registrationare increasingly
beingconsidered30

On the basis of Article 3.6 of the Directive 2012/28/EU of the
European Parliament and of the Council of 25 October 2012 on
certain permitted uses of orphan works, a publicly accessible
online database is currently being set up by the Office
forHarmonisation of theInternalMarket (OHIM)for the
registration of orphan works.

.

Wouldthecreation ofa registration system at EU levelhelp in the
identification and licensing of works and other subject matter?

YES

xNO

ISAN and EIDR are the international and approved norm; they must
therefore also be supported and pushed. The voluntary nature of
the system must be emphasized. Under this condition, the use of
identifiers must be welcomed.

There have been a number of achievements in the past regarding
the identification of AV content. After all, international
organisations such as FIAPF support the International Standard
Audiovisual Number ISAN, which is now ISO standard. Together
with the notifier EIDF developed in the USA, this is now an
undisputed industry benchmark. Generally, focusing exploitation
rights on the producers reduces demand in the audiovisual sector
and leads to a lack of clarity regarding who is legally
responsible for exploitation. All types of registration must of
course be welcomed so long as they are voluntary and take into
account international standardisation norms. But it is worth
pointing out that neither ISAN nor EIDR provide information
about the actual right holders; such a database is currently
still impossible. Both tools serve to identify films. Since
exploitation is bundled with the producer anyway, a closer
determination of copyright ownership for the various creative
parties involved in making a film is not necessary in the B2B
area and probably also impracticable.

NO OPINION

What would bethe possible advantagesof such a system?

[Open question]

We do not believe that a registration system at EU level would
offer benefits over and above those of existing identification
systems accepted on the market (ISAN, EIDR).By contrast, higher
administration costs could mean disadvantages for the AV
economy. Currently, only existing systems on the markets can
ensure the frequently required technical updates.

A non-obligatory database combined with an identification of the
relevant audiovisual product using a system accepted on the
market (ISAN, EIDR) could make it a lot easier to license works
and also to charge for them (which is related to
identification), especially for collecting societies. But as a
condition, the principle of non-formality would generally need
to be maintained and no further conditions or legal
consequences would have to be linked to identification.
Resulting administration, including costs, could be
discriminating or damaging especially for products focused on
regional markets.

We therefore do not believe that a registration system at EU
level would offer benefits over and above those of existing
identification systems accepted on the market. The latter have
proven to be cost-efficient, safe, accepted and thus
comparative, and are constantly maintained with
state-of-the-art technology. Introducing an additional
identifier would not provide an advantage, but under certain
circumstances possibly a disadvantage given the costs and
administrative efforts involved.

What would bethe possible disadvantagesof such a system?

[Open question]

The market already has approved systems with ISAN and EIDR,
which are consistently developed further. There is no need for
a separate EU solution, which might be cost and administration
intensive.

We have already referred to possible disadvantages of a new
registration system at EU level. The market already has
approved systems with ISAN and EIDR, which are consistently
developed further, and also must be developed further. As a
result, there is no need to create a separate EU solution,
which might be cost or administration intensive, would require
constant updating and - like every registration system - would
also be susceptible to infringements and incorrect information
regarding the rights situation.

Whatincentives forregistrationbyrightholderscouldbe envisaged?

[Open question]

Little administration,

low registration fees,

transparency,

recognition of registration costs by public funding bodies.

The incentives for right holders are in the registration systems
themselves and these also consistently develop them further.

How to improve the
==================

use andinteroperability ofidentifiers

There are many private databases ofworks and other subject
matterheld by producers, collective management organisations,
and institutions such aslibraries, which are based to a greater
or lesser extent on the use of(more or less)interoperable,
internationally agreed ‘identifiers’. Identifierscan be
compared to a reference number embedded in a work,are specific
to the sector in which they have been developed31

E.g. the International Standard Recording Code (ISRC) is used to
identify recordings, the International Standard Book Number
(ISBN) is used to identify books.

, and identify, variously, the work itself, the owner or the
contributor to a work or other subject matter.There are notable
examples of where industry is undertaking actions to improve the
interoperability of such identifiers and databases. The Global
Repertoire Database32

You will find more information about this initiative on the
following website:http://www.globalrepertoiredatabase.com/.

should, once operational,provide a single source of information
on the ownership and control of musical works worldwide. The
Linked Content Coalition33

You will find more information about this initiative(funded in
part by the European Commission)on the following website:
www.linkedcontentcoalition.org.

was established to develop building blocks for the expression
and management of rights and licensing across all content and
media types. It includes the development ofa Rights Reference
Model (RRM) – a comprehensive data model for all types of
rights in all types of content. The UK Copyright Hub34

You will find more information about this initiative on the
following website:http://www.copyrighthub.co.uk/.

is seeking to take such identification systems a step further,
and to create a linked platform, enabling automated licensing
across different sectors.

Whatshouldbethe role of theEUin promoting the adoption
of identifiers in the content sector, and in promoting the
development and interoperability of rights ownership and
permissions databases?

[Open question]

Two identifier systems are currently common in the audiovisual
sector: on the one hand the ISO-approved international standard
audiovisual number ISAN and on the other hand the entertainment
identifier EIDR.To the extent that the EU takes on its role to
encourage the market to make better use of the given
opportunities, this must be fully welcomed. Any intervention in
excess of that, particularly a legislatory intervention with
mandatory effects, must be rejected.

The European Commission has repeatedly stressed the role of
identification systems, and we share this view, Incidentally,
this was last broached in the stakeholder dialogue 'Licenses
for Europe'.

The promotion of the further use of "identifiers" and in
addition the compatibility between ISAN and EIDR continue to be
a serious challenge. To the extent that the EU takes on its role
to encourage the market to make better use of the given
opportunities, this must be fully welcomed.Any intervention in
excess of that, particularly a legislatory intervention with
mandatory effects, must be rejected. Support from the new
program 'Creative Europe' - as planned based on the stakeholder
dialogue 'Licenses for Europe' - will be extremely helpful.

In Austria, the low costs of such a registration are approved
for the film funding calculation. Yet the fact remains that
registration options are far from exhausted and many producers
do not make use of them. In some countries, film funding
associations might prescribe the use of such identifiers as
mandatory - at least for theatrical films. At the same time,
collecting societies at least successfully use other
metatagging systems for identification (e.g. Denmark).

Term of protection– is it appropriate?

Works and other subject matter are protected under copyright for
a limited period of time. After the term of protection has
expired, a work falls into the public domain and can be freely
used by anyone (in accordance with the applicable national
rules on moral rights). The Berne Convention35

Berne Convention for the Protection of Literary and Artistic
Works,http://www.wipo.int/treaties/en/ip/berne/.

requiresa minimum term of protection of 50 years after the death
of the author. The EUrulesextend this term of protection to 70
years after the death of the author (as do many other
countries, e.g. the US).

With regard to performers in the music sector and phonogram
producers, theterm provided for in theEU rulesalsoextend20
years beyond what is mandated in international
agreements,providingfor a term of protection of 70 years after
the first publication. Performers and producers in the
audio-visual sector, however, do not benefit from such an
extended term of protection.

Arethe current terms ofcopyright protection still appropriate in
the digital environment?

xYES– Please explain

The cost-intensive production financing can only be maintained
with traceable and secure copyright protection. The costs of
developing and producing the product are equally high for
digital exploitation. As a result, exploitation windows,
co-financings and above all copyright periods for the
sustainable exploitation of the work of course remain a
condition for justifying the economic risks of the expensive
product Film and for achieving a return of investment.

Not only in the digital environment, but generally, such
copyright periods are entirely justified, and anyway part of
international copyright law and of the EU-wide guideline on
copyright periods. The cost-intensive production financing can
only be maintained with traceable and secure copyright
protection. Otherwise, competition with non-EU third-party
countries, particularly the USA, must be considered, also in
terms of the current criticism of copyright periods by some
groups. A one-sided reduction in the EU can only further widen
the gap between the already unmatched economic conditions of
market powers in the audiovisual area.

Otherwise, there is no reason why copyright periods should be
treated differently in the digital compared to the analogue
environment. After all, the costs of developing and producing
the product must be viewed in the same way as for digital
exploitation. As a result, exploitation windows, co-financings
and above all copyright periods for the sustainable
exploitation of the work of course remain a condition for
justifying the economic risks of the expensive product Film.

The film and music industry has therefore always been against
any initiative shorten or modify copyright periods. We would
like to point out that, in addition to the present
international rights situation, this would also affect the EU
Charter on Fundamental Rights and Freedoms, which also
guarantees the property rights of the other creative parties
involved.

The reason why the film industry is also against implementing a
longer copyright period for producers in Europe analogue to the
music industry is that the business models for music and film
are completely different. The conditions that would quite
sensibly result from a longer copyright period for performers
and producers in the music industry would thus explicitly be
unsuitable for film.

NO– Please explain if they should be longer or shorter

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO OPINION

Limitations and exceptions in the Single Market

Limitations and exceptions to copyright and related rights
enable the use of works and other protected
subject-matter,without obtaining authorisation from the
rightholders,for certain purposes and to a certain extent (for
instance the use for illustrationpurposesof an extract from a
novelby a teacher in a literature class). At EU level theyare
established in a number of copyright directives, most notably
Directive2001/29/EC36

Plus Directive 96/9/ECon the legal protection of
databases;Directive 2009/24/ECon the legal protection of
computer programs,and Directive 92/100/ECon rental right and
lending right.

.

Exceptions and limitations in the national and EU copyright laws
have to respect international law37

Article 9(2) of the Berne Convention for the Protection of
Literary and Artistic Works (1971); Article 13 of the TRIPS
Agreement (Trade Related Intellectual Property Rights) 1994;
Article 16(2) of the WIPO Performers and Phonograms Treaty
(1996); Article 9(2) of the WIPO Copyright Treaty (1996).

.In accordance with international obligations, the EU acquis
requires that limitations and exceptionscanonlybeapplied in
certain special cases which do not conflict with a normal
exploitation of the work or other subject matter and do not
unreasonably prejudice the legitimate interest of the
rightholders.

Whereas thecatalogueof limitations and exceptions included
inEUlawis exhaustive(no other exceptions can be applied to the
rights harmonised at EU level)38

Other than the grandfathering of the exceptions of minor
importance for analogue uses existing in Member States at the
time of adoption ofDirective 2001/29/EC(see, Art. 5(3)(o)).

, these limitations and exceptions areoftenoptional39

With the exception ofcertain limitations: (i)in the Computer
Programs Directive,(ii) in the Database Directive,(iii) Article
5(1) in theDirective 2001/29/ECand(iv) the OrphanWorksDirective.

,in the sense thatMember Statesare free to reflect in national
legislation as many or as few of them as they wish.Moreover,the
formulation of certain of the limitations andexceptionsis
general enough to give significantflexibility totheMember
States as to how,and to what extent,toimplement them (if they
decide to do so). Finally,it is worth noting that not all of
the limitationsand exceptionsincluded in the EUlegal framework
for copyrightare of equivalent significance in policy terms and
in terms of their potential effect on the functioning of the
Single Market.

Inaddition, inthe same manner that the definition of the rights
is territorial (i.e. has an effect only within the territory of
the Member State), the definition of the limitations and
exceptions to the rights is territorial too (so an act that is
covered by an exception in a Member State "A" may still require
the authorisation of the rightholder once we move to the Member
State "B")40

Only theexception established in therecent Orphan Works
Directive(a mandatory exceptionto copyright and related rights
in the case where the rightholders are not known or cannot be
located) has been givena cross-border effect, which means that,
for instance, once a literary work – for instance a novel – is
considered an orphan work in a Member State, that same
novelshall be considered an orphan work in all Member Statesand
can beused and accessed in all Member States.

.

The cross-bordereffectoflimitations andexceptionsalsoraises the
question of fair compensation of rightholders.In some
instances,Member States are obliged to compensate rightholders
for theharminflicted on them bya limitation orexceptionto their
rights. In other instancesMember Statesare not obliged, butmay
decide,to provide for such compensation.If a limitation or
exception triggering a mechanism of fair compensation were to
be given cross-border effect (e.g. the books are used for
illustration in an online course given by an university in
a Member State "A" and the students are in a Member State"B")
then there would also be a need to clarifywhich national law
shoulddeterminethe level of that compensation and who should
pay it.

Finally, the question of flexibility and adaptabilityis being
raised:what is the best mechanism to ensure that the EU and
Member States’ regulatory frameworks adapt when necessary
(either to clarify that certain uses are covered by an
exception or to confirm that for certain uses the authorisation
of rightholders is required)?The main question here is whether
a greaterdegree of flexibility can be introduced in the EU and
Member States regulatory framework while ensuringthe
requiredlegal certainty,including for the functioning of the
Single Market, and respecting the EU's international
obligations.

Are there problems arising from the fact that most limitations
and exceptions provided in the EUcopyrightdirectivesare
optionalfor the Member States?

YES – Please explain by referring to specific cases

xNO – Please explain

The copyright directive contains an extensive list of a total of
20 exceptions and limitations - some of them obligatory, others
optional. It is precisely this which allows for a flexible and
suitable implementation on a national level. The principle of
subsidiarity must rightly be maintained.

The copyright directive contains an extensive list of a total of
20 exceptions and limitations - some of them obligatory, others
optional. It is precisely this which allows for a flexible and
suitable implementation on a national level without
overstretching a generally welcome harmonisation. The principle
of subsidiarity is rightly maintained. This does not lead to
major practical problems. Current options enable EU member
states to independently make a decision regarding the
implementation of the exceptions and limitations, in line with
the subsidiarity principle. This does not prevent the EU from
supporting or pushing harmonising steps so long as these do not
end in mandatory measures.

Acceptance of the 3-step test is an important element in
guaranteeing the fair balance between the property rights of
the creative parties and the interests of the consumers in
accessing knowledge, information and entertainment.

NO OPINION

Should some/all of the exceptions be made mandatory and, if so,
is there aneed for a higher level of harmonisation of such
exceptions?

YES–Please explain byreferringto specific cases

xNO–Please explain

The current of the copyright directive, with its 20 exceptions
and its mixture of mandatory and voluntary measures, is an
effective and flexible compromise, and takes into account the
principle of subsidiarity. It also justifies the national
differences in the copyright regimes of the member states.

We must keep in mind that the European Court of Justice in its
interpretation of the exceptions and extensions has not yet
published a uniform interpretation. Currently, both
international and EU law provide the necessary flexibility, and
this is undoubtedly still required in light of the different
legal systems and traditions of the 29 EU member states.

No convincing line of argument has so far been presented for
harmonising, and also amending, the list of exceptions and
limitations. By contrast, the online exploitation models
currently on the market, which are becoming more and more
successful each year, show that the current regime does not
prevent development, and works are sold online - both
nationally and, where suitable, supranationally.

NO OPINION

Should any newlimitations andexceptions be added toor removed
fromthe existing catalogue?Please explain by referring to
specific cases.

[Open question]

There is no need to experiment with new or restricting lists of
exceptions for the existing, well thought-out and long tried
and tested catalogue of Art. 5.

The copyright regulations of the copyright directive with its 20
exceptions and limitations are quite flexible and sufficient.
The member states also accept it - adapted to their legal
systems -, and there is no evidence of a market failure.
Special legal solutions were created for specific solutions,
such as orphaned works, and each intervention into the flexible
balance of Art. 5 would require a genuine justification and a
thorough prior evaluation of the issue. Taking account of the
3-step test, the balance of interests between consumers,
creative consumers (user generated content), producers and
creative parties is easily sufficient to ensure access to
knowledge and information in line with basic rights.

Independently from the questions above, is there a need to
provide for agreaterdegree of flexibility in the EU regulatory
framework for limitations and exceptions?

YES – Please explain why

xNO – Please explain why

The legal tools of the EU are based on a decade-long tradition
of European copyright law. If a term foreign to the European
copyright system was introduced, such as "fair use", which is
also subject to decades of judicature in the USA and fully
developed there, this would be unlikely to offer additional
legal security for the European system - on the contrary.

In many discussions, especially in the online community, the
term "fair use" is used as a synonym for the greater
flexibility required there (see Question 24) and/or as a clear
extension to the exceptions and limitations. However, the fair
use system developed in the tradition of Anglo-American law,
and is hardly compatible with European law, extremely complex
in judicature and certainly also something other than the free
use, which many interpret the term "fair" to mean. Parts of the
fair use idea are included in the existing catalogue of Art. 5
of the copyright directive anyway, and member states need only
make use of the options of utilising the catalogue. Exceptions
such as quotation rights or a flexible definition of additional
film works could no doubt ease problems in legal borderline
cases - without adding to confusion by introducing a legal tool
foreign to European law. It is also worth mentioning that in the
end, fair use is also subject to the 3-step test, so that any
free use en masse, which is the online community's objective,
could also not be achieved. This is because mass reproductions
or public performances even in the online area still impact on
the exploitation interests and personal rights of the author,
and so would necessarily also fail to be subject to fair use.

The current system, consisting of mutually complementary
national legal systems, the harmonising EU Copyright Directive
and the interpreting judicature of the European Court of
Justice, appears to be the most suitable system for making
copyright "internet compatible" for the new online media. These
legal tools are based on a decade-long tradition of European
copyright law. If a term foreign to the European copyright
system was introduced, such as "fair use", which is also
subject to decades of judicature in the USA and fully developed
there, this would be unlikely to offer additional legal security
for the European system - on the contrary.

NO OPINION

If yes, what would be the best approach to provide for
flexibility? (e.g.interpretation by national courts and the
ECJ, periodic revisions of the directives, interpretations by
the Commission, built-in flexibility, e.g. in the form of a
fair-useor fair dealingprovision / open norm, etc.)?Please
explain indicating what would be the relative advantages and
disadvantages of such an approachas well asitspossible effects
on the functioning of the Internal Market.

[Open question]

Whereas American law defines fair use and case by case, the term
would have to be "reinvented" in Europe. The hopes of some
consumer organisations for unlimited free access is unlikely to
be fulfilled with regard to the 3-step test. The European system
of predefined exceptions in Art. 5 corresponds to the legal
tradition of European legal systems.

Even though the term "fair use" is especially used by the online
community - in the belief that it would provide greater
flexibility and benefit consumers - fair use in contrast to the
European system of embedded exceptions and limitations contains
a number of disadvantages, above all a high degree of legal
uncertainty.

Does the territoriality of limitations and exceptions, in your
experience,constitute a problem?

YES–Please explain why andspecify which exceptions you are
referring to

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

xNO–Please explainwhy andspecify which exceptions you are
referring to

The consequences of harmonising the "limitations and exceptions"
according to the InfoSoc Guideline took some time, but are
becoming more and more apparent: Based on the legislature of
the ECJ, and above on all the interpretation of the most
important provisions of the guideline, including the
application of the three-step test, the system of "limitations
and exceptions" is practised more and more harmoniously in the
EU. The member states are increasingly using their competences
according to the guideline. This serves the objective of the
single market. It is governed by an understanding that the
different traditions of copyright law in many member states
cannot be overcome quickly. Amendments to the "limitations and
exceptions" in this stage require a careful analysis and
pertinent evidence in order not to put the current
harmonisation process at risk.

NO OPINION

In the event that limitationsand exceptionsestablished at
national level were to have cross-border effect, howshouldthe
question of “fair compensation” be addressed, whensuch
compensation is part of the exception? (e.g. who pays whom,
where?)

[Open question]

Based on international norms and EU copyright, compensation for
the exploitation act outside the original country of creation
must be paid where the exploitation act takes place.The member
states should be able to freely decide whether the existing
decision rules are to remain effective in their sovereign
territory. The income of right holders should in no way be
weakened in order to promote harmonised "limitations and
exceptions" in the EU.

Wherever the general public benefits from use due to a "fair
use" or other regulation without individual licensing, this
must not be at the expense of the creative parties, and income
generated in this way (including advertising revenues in the
online area) must be suitably distributed to the creative
parties. This is the focus of the system of collecting
societies with its generally multilateral linkages via
corresponding bilateral contracts. It is a basic condition for
online platforms focused on economic interests - which
undoubtedly also includes iTunes, YouTube, etc. - to regulate
their income generated from copyright exploitations using such
contracts with collecting societies. Currently, the situation
is such that compensation for substantial income generated
online, across borders and multilaterally from audiovisual
content is either paid insufficiently or that there is a lack
of corresponding agreements with collecting societies/
individual licensing. Legal platforms in the online area may
have numerous options to remove illegal or unlicensed content;
but we can assume that the profits that online platforms
generate via direct sales or indirectly from advertising or
other systems do not reach artists or creative parties, or not
to a sufficient degree. Here, the greatest need for action is
in the interest of European cultural diversity and finally also
in the interest of a fair compensation for artists.. Based on
international norms and EU copyright, compensation for the
exploitation act outside the original country of creation must
be paid where the exploitation act takes place.

Access to content in libraries and archives
===========================================

Directive2001/29/EC enablesMember Statesto reflect in their
national law a rangeoflimitations andexceptions for the benefit
of publicly accessible libraries, educational establishments and
museums, as well as archives. If implemented, these
exceptionsallow acts of preservation and archiving41

Article 5(2)c of Directive 2001/29.

andenable on-site consultation oftheworks and other subject
matter in the collections of such institutions42

Article 5(3)nof Directive 2001/29.

. The public lending(under an exception or limitation)by these
establishments of physical copies of works and other subject
matter is governed by the Rental and Lending Directive43

Article 5 of Directive 2006/115/EC.

.

Questionsarise as to whetherthe current framework continues to
achieve the objectives envisaged or whether it needs to be
clarified or updated to cover use in digital networks. At the
same time, questions arise as to the effect of such a possible
expansion on the normal exploitation of works and other subject
matter and as to the prejudice this may cause to rightholders.
The role of licensing and possible framework agreements between
different stakeholders also needsto be considered here.

Preservationand archiving

The preservation of the copies of worksor othersubject-matter
held in the collections of cultural establishments (e.g. books,
records, or films)– the restoration or replacement of works, the
copying of fragile works -mayinvolvethe creation ofanother
copy/iesof these worksor othersubject matter. Most Member
States provide for an exception in their national laws allowing
for the making of such preservation copies.The scope of the
exceptiondiffersfrom Member State to Member State(as regardsthe
type of beneficiary establishments, the types of
works/subject-mattercovered by the exception, the mode of
copyingand the number of reproductions that a beneficiary
establishment may make).Also, the current legal status of new
types of preservation activities (e.g. harvesting and archiving
publicly available web content) is often uncertain.

(a)[In particular if you arean institutional user:]Haveyou
experienced specific problems when trying to use an exception
to preserve and archive specific works or other subject matter
in your collection?

(b)[In particular if you arearightholder:]Have you experienced
problems with the use by libraries, educational establishments,
museum or archives of the preservation exception?

YES – Please explain, by Member State, sector, and the type
of use in question.

xNO

In Austria, there is no problem at all in this regard.

Since nearly all films utilised for theatrical exploitation are
supported by the Federal Film Funding Association, they are
governed by the archiving obligation set out in this.

As a result, film producers are not only obligated to preserve
Austrian film heritage and the relevant access according to
national rules, - e.g. library use or use for science, teaching
and research - but in many ways also have an interest in this.
This may not be a legal archiving obligation. But the
provisions in all regional and federal film funding guidelines
ensure that 100% of films are preserved and maintained at a
high level of quality. In addition, there is a master agreement
regarding voluntary archiving with film heritage institutions,
which FIAPF already agreed with European institutions in 1972
and which was renewed only recently. In the context of the
licenses for Europe process, a "statement of principles and
procedures" was agreed, which acts as a tool to achieve the
relevant framework conditions for digitisation and for access
to European film heritage.

NO OPINION

If there are problems, how would theybestbe solved?

[Open question]

In Austria, there is no problem at all in this regard.

Since nearly all films utilised for theatrical exploitation are
supported by the Federal Film Funding Association, they are
governed by the archiving obligation set out in this.

As a result, film producers are not only obligated to preserve
Austrian film heritage and the relevant access according to
national rules, - e.g. library use or use for science, teaching
and research - but in many ways also have an interest in this.
This may not be a legal archiving obligation. But the
provisions in all regional and federal film funding guidelines
ensure that 100% of films are preserved and maintained at a
high level of quality. In addition, there is a master agreement
regarding voluntary archiving with film heritage institutions,
which FIAPF already agreed with European institutions in 1972
and which was renewed only recently. In the context of the
licenses for Europe process, a "statement of principles and
procedures" was agreed, which acts as a tool to achieve the
relevant framework conditions for digitisation and for access
to European film heritage.

If your view is that a legislative solution is needed, what
would be its main elements? Which activities of the beneficiary
institutions should be coveredand under which conditions?

[Open question]

No further legislative solution is required. Voluntary solutions
and the planned obligations in the funding regulations have
proven to be 100% and suitable. In Austria, there is no problem
at all in this regard.

Since nearly all films utilised for theatrical exploitation are
supported by the Federal Film Funding Association, they are
governed by the archiving obligation set out in this.

As a result, film producers are not only obligated to preserve
Austrian film heritage and the relevant access according to
national rules, - e.g. library use or use for science, teaching
and research - but in many ways also have an interest in this.
This may not be a legal archiving obligation. But the
provisions in all regional and federal film funding guidelines
ensure that 100% of films are preserved and maintained at a
high level of quality. In addition, there is a master agreement
regarding voluntary archiving with film heritage institutions,
which FIAPF already agreed with European institutions in 1972
and which was renewed only recently. In the context of the
licenses for Europe process, a "statement of principles and
procedures" was agreed, which acts as a tool to achieve the
relevant framework conditions for digitisation and for access
to European film heritage.

If your view is thatadifferent solutionisneeded, what would it
be?

[Open question]

No further legislative solution is required. Voluntary solutions
and the planned obligations in the funding regulations have
proven to be 100% and suitable.

In Austria, there is no problem at all in this regard.

Since nearly all films utilised for theatrical exploitation are
supported by the Federal Film Funding Association, they are
governed by the archiving obligation set out in this.

As a result, film producers are not only obligated to preserve
Austrian film heritage and the relevant access according to
national rules, - e.g. library use or use for science, teaching
and research - but in many ways also have an interest in this.
This may not be a legal archiving obligation. But the
provisions in all regional and federal film funding guidelines
ensure that 100% of films are preserved and maintained at a
high level of quality. In addition, there is a master agreement
regarding voluntary archiving with film heritage institutions,
which FIAPF already agreed with European institutions in 1972
and which was renewed only recently. In the context of the
licenses for Europe process, a "statement of principles and
procedures" was agreed, which acts as a tool to achieve the
relevant framework conditions for digitisation and for access
to European film heritage.

Off-premises access to library collections
------------------------------------------

Directive 2001/29/EC provides an exception
fortheconsultationofworks and other subject-matter(consulting
an e-book, watching a documentary) viadedicated terminals on
the premises of such establishmentsfor the purpose of research
and private study. The online consultation ofworks and other
subject-matter remotely(i.e. when the library user is not on
the premises of the library)requires authorisation andis
generallyaddressed in agreements between universities/libraries
and publishers.Some argue that the law rather than agreements
should provide for the possibility to, and the conditions
for,grantingonline access to collections.

(a)[In particular if you are an institutional user:]Have you
experienced specific problems when trying to negotiate
agreements with rights holders that enable you to provide
remote access, including across borders,to your collections (or
parts thereof) for purposes of research and private study?

(b)[Inparticular if you are an enduser/consumer:]Have you
experienced specific problems when trying to consult, including
across borders,works and other subject-matter held in the
collections of institutions such as universities and national
libraries when you are not on the premises of the institutions
in question?

(c)[In particular if you are arightholder:]Have you negotiated
agreements with institutional users that enable those
institutions to provide remote access, including across
borders,to the works or other subject-matter in their
collections, for purposes of research and private study?

[Open question]

It is of course possible to access these works for purposes of
research and study. This is set out in the limitations and
exceptions of Section 42 ff of the Austrian Copyright Act.

There are no corresponding agreements in Austria; but there was
also no demand to conclude such agreements on the part of these
institutions - neither on a national nor a supranational level.

If there are problems, how would theybestbe solved?

[Open question]

It is of course possible to access these works for purposes of
research and study. This is set out in the limitations and
exceptions of Section 42 ff of the Austrian Copyright Act.

In spite of regular contact with the corresponding institutions,
no desire was ever expressed to conclude individual or
association agreements in excess of the legal provisions of
Section 32 ff.

If your view is that a legislative solution is needed, what
would be its main elements? Which activities of the beneficiary
institutions should be coveredand under which conditions?

[Open question]

It is of course possible to access these works for purposes of
research and study. This is set out in the limitations and
exceptions of Section 42 ff of the Austrian Copyright Act.
Since there is no obvious demand on the part of institutions, a
legislative provision would be unnecessary or possibly even
counter-productive.

If your view is thatadifferent solutionisneeded, what would it
be?

[Open question]

It is of course possible to access these works for purposes of
research and study. This is set out in the limitations and
exceptions of Section 42 ff of the Austrian Copyright Act.

Since there is no obvious demand on the part of institutions, a
legislative provision would be unnecessary or possibly even
counter-productive.

E –
---

lending

Traditionally, public libraries haveloanedphysical copies of
works (i.e. books, sometimes also CDs and DVDs) to their users.
Recent technological developments have made it technically
possible for libraries to provide users with temporary access
to digital content, such as e-books, music or films via
networks. Under the current legal framework, libraries need to
obtain the authorisation of the rights holders
toorganisesuche-lending activities. In various Member States,
publishers and libraries are currently experimenting with
different business models for the making available of works
online, including direct supply of e-books to libraries by
publishers or bundling byaggregators.

(a)[In particular if you are alibrary:]Have you experienced
specific problems when trying tonegotiate agreements to enable
the electronic lending(e-lending), including across borders,
ofbooks or other materials held in your collection?

(b)[In particular if you are an enduser/consumer:]Haveyou
experienced specific problems when trying to borrow booksor
other materialselectronically (e-lending), including across
borders,from institutionssuch as public libraries?

(c)[In particular if you are aright holder:]Have you negotiated
agreements with libraries to enable them to lend books or other
materials electronically, including across borders?

YES – Please explainwith specific examples

xNO

Section 42 ff prescribes exceptions and restrictions for
Austrian copyright law and also contains special provisions for
using audiovisual works in libraries and for purposes of
research and teaching.

These exceptions are designed in such a way that a compensation
obligation for the authors is recorded by way of collective
remuneration. Regarding libraries, it must be noted that a
limited number of copies is available, and these can normally
only be borrowed/consumed within the rooms of the library, or
analogue. But this has not led to demand by the institutions in
the past. By contrast, individual solutions may have been
arranged in specific cases, e.g. because the libraries in
Vienna already offer specific literary works, and at times also
music, online for e-lending purposes. This is based on
individual agreements. So far, neither the collecting societies
nor the relevant associations have been told of any demand in
excess of that, so that no such talks have taken place.

As far as we know, the different treatment of analogue
consumption on site or through lending compared to online
lending may also above all be due to technical problems, e.g.
wanting to prevent an abuse of online lending with appropriate
technical measures. As a result, libraries obviously have
limited interest. However, the different treatment of online
distribution by libraries or similar institutions may also be
justified by pointing out that audiovisual works in Austria are
also available in libraries from DVD release. A broad, de facto
free offer at libraries would thus not only restrict the normal
exploitation of sound and image media, but also limit the
options of commercial online platforms to develop and expand
their corresponding market. In this context, libraries or
similar institutions are therefore in competition with the
usual exploitation and the development of national and
multiterritorial content of online offers of AV content also
desired by the EU. Given the fact that libraries are public
institutions, which are either free or funded by cheap annual
fees, this different treatment is justified.

NO OPINION

If there are problems, how wouldtheybestbe solved?

[Open question]

Section 42 ff prescribes exceptions and restrictions for
Austrian copyright law and also contains special provisions for
using audiovisual works in libraries and for purposes of
research and teaching.

These exceptions are designed in such a way that a compensation
obligation for the authors is recorded by way of collective
remuneration. Regarding libraries, it must be noted that a
limited number of copies is available, and these can normally
only be borrowed/consumed within the rooms of the library, or
analogue. But this has not led to demand by the institutions in
the past. By contrast, individual solutions may have been
arranged in specific cases, e.g. because the libraries in
Vienna already offer specific literary works, and at times also
music, online for e-lending purposes. This is based on
individual agreements. So far, neither the collecting societies
nor the relevant associations have been told of any demand in
excess of that, so that no such talks have taken place.

As far as we know, the different treatment of analogue
consumption on site or through lending compared to online
lending may also above all be due to technical problems, e.g.
wanting to prevent an abuse of online lending with appropriate
technical measures. As a result, libraries obviously have
limited interest. However, the different treatment of online
distribution by libraries or similar institutions may also be
justified by pointing out that audiovisual works in Austria are
also available in libraries from DVD release. A broad, de facto
free offer at libraries would thus not only restrict the normal
exploitation of sound and image media, but also limit the
options of commercial online platforms to develop and expand
their corresponding market. In this context, libraries or
similar institutions are therefore in competition with the
usual exploitation and the development of national and
multiterritorial content of online offers of AV content also
desired by the EU. Given the fact that libraries are public
institutions, which are either free or funded by cheap annual
fees, this different treatment is justified.

The following two questions are relevant bothtothis point (n° 3)
and the previous one (n° 2).

[In particular if you are an institutional user:]What
differences do you see in the management of physical and online
collections, including providing access to your subscribers?
What problems have you encountered?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

[In particular if you are a right holder:]What difference do you
see betweenlibraries’traditional activities such as on-premises
consultation or public lending and activities such as
off-premises (online, at a distance) consultation and
e-lending? What problems have you encountered?

[Open question]

Section 42 ff prescribes exceptions and restrictions for
Austrian copyright law and also contains special provisions for
using audiovisual works in libraries and for purposes of
research and teaching.

These exceptions are designed in such a way that a compensation
obligation for the authors is recorded by way of collective
remuneration. Regarding libraries, it must be noted that a
limited number of copies is available, and these can normally
only be borrowed/consumed within the rooms of the library, or
analogue. But this has not led to demand by the institutions in
the past. By contrast, individual solutions may have been
arranged in specific cases, e.g. because the libraries in
Vienna already offer specific literary works, and at times also
music, online for e-lending purposes. This is based on
individual agreements. So far, neither the collecting societies
nor the relevant associations have been told of any demand in
excess of that, so that no such talks have taken place.

As far as we know, the different treatment of analogue
consumption on site or through lending compared to online
lending may also above all be due to technical problems, e.g.
wanting to prevent an abuse of online lending with appropriate
technical measures. As a result, libraries obviously have
limited interest. However, the different treatment of online
distribution by libraries or similar institutions may also be
justified by pointing out that audiovisual works in Austria are
also available in libraries from DVD release. A broad, de facto
free offer at libraries would thus not only restrict the normal
exploitation of sound and image media, but also limit the
options of commercial online platforms to develop and expand
their corresponding market. In this context, libraries or
similar institutions are therefore in competition with the
usual exploitation and the development of national and
multiterritorial content of online offers of AV content also
desired by the EU. Given the fact that libraries are public
institutions, which are either free or funded by cheap annual
fees, this different treatment is justified.

Mass digitisation
-----------------

The term “mass digitisation” is normally used to refer to
efforts by institutions such as libraries and archives to
digitise (e.g. scan) the entire content or part of their
collections with an objective to preserve these collections
and, normally, to make them available to the public. Examples
are efforts by libraries to digitise novels form the early part
of the 20thcentury or whole collections of pictures of
historical value. This matter has been partly addressed at the
EU level by the 2011 Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) on key
principles on the digitisationand making available of out
of commerce works (i.e. works which are no longer found in the
normal channels of commerce),whichisaimingto facilitatemass
digitisation efforts (for books and learned journals) on the
basis of licence agreements between libraries and similar
cultural institutions on the one hand and the collecting
societies representing authors and publishers on the other44

You will find more information about his MoU on the following
website:http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/copyright/out-of-commerce/index_en.htm.

.Provided the required funding is ensured(digitisation projects
are extremely expensive),the result of this MoU should bethat
books that are currently to be found only in the archives of,
for instance, libraries will be digitised and made available
online to everyone.The MoU is based on voluntary licences
(granted by Collective Management Organisations on the basis of
the mandates they receive from authors and publishers). Some
Member States may need to enact legislation to ensure the
largest possible effect ofsuchlicences (e.g. by establishing in
legislation a presumption of representation of a collecting
society or the recognition of an “extended effect” to the
licences granted)45

France and Germany have already adopted legislation to back the
effects of the MoU.The French act (LOI n° 2012-287 du 1er mars
2012 relative à l'exploitation numérique des livres
indisponibles du xxe siècle) foresees collectivemanagement,
unless the author or publisher in question opposes such
management.The German act (Gesetz zur Nutzung verwaister und
vergriffener Werke und einer weiteren Änderung des
Urheberrechtsgesetzes vom 1.Oktober 2013) contains a legal
presumption of representation by a collectingsociety in
relation to works whose rightholdersare not members of the
collecting society.

.

[In particular if you are an institutional user,engaging or
wanting to engage in mass digitisation projects,a
rightholder,acollective management organisation:]Woulditbe
necessaryin your country to enact legislationto ensure
thattheresults of the 2011 MoU (i.e. the agreements concluded
between libraries and collecting societies) havea cross-border
effect sothatout of commerce workscan be accessedacross the EU?

YES – Please explainwhy and how it could best be achieved

xNO – Please explain

The question when a work is "out of commerce" is already
governed on a national level, and there are also no special
rules for libraries or collecting societies regarding films and
music.

We must bring back to mind that the current legal situation
regarding out of commerce works does not contain special
provisions even nationally, but only those provisions relating
to orphaned works, which Austria and other member states must
implement at the latest by 2015. The question when a work is
"out of commerce" is already governed on a national level, and
there are also no special rules for libraries or collecting
societies regarding films and music.

NO OPINION

Would it be necessary to develop mechanisms, beyond those
already agreed for other typesof content (e.g.for audio- or
audio-visual collections, broadcasters’ archives)?

YES – Please explain

xNO – Please explain

The question when a work is "out of commerce" is already
governed on a national level, and there are also no special
rules for libraries or collecting societies regarding films and
music.

We must bring back to mind that the current legal situation
regarding out of commerce works does not contain special
provisions even nationally, but only those provisions relating
to orphaned works, which Austria and other member states must
implement at the latest by 2015. The question when a work is
"out of commerce" is already governed on a national level, and
there are also no special rules for libraries or collecting
societies regarding films and music.

NO OPINION

Teaching

Directive 2001/29/EC46

Article 5(3)aof Directive 2001/29.

enables Member States to implement in their national
legislationlimitations and exceptionsfor the purpose of
illustration fornon-commercialteaching. Such exceptions would
typically allow a teacher to use parts of or full works to
illustrate his course,e.g.by distributing copies of fragments
of a book or of newspaper articles in the classroom or by
showing protected content on a smart boardwithout having to
obtain authorisation from the right holders.The open
formulation of this (optional) provision allows for rather
different implementation at Member States level.The
implementation of the exception differs from Member State to
Member State, with several Member States providinginsteada
framework for the licensing of contentforcertain
educationaluses. Some argue that the lawshould provide for
better possibilities for distance learningand study at home.

(a)[In particular if youare an enduser/consumeror an
institutional user:]Have you experienced specific problems when
trying to use works orother subject-matter for illustration for
teaching, including across borders?

(b)[In particular if youarearight holder:]Have
youexperiencedspecificproblems resulting from the wayin
whichworks or other subject-matter are used for illustration
for teaching, including across borders?

YES–Please explain

xNO

Austrian copyright law includes an exception for the use of
copyright-protected works in the area of teaching and
education, which means that copyright-protected works can be
used for teaching purposes, but compensation must be paid
collectively (exclusively by collecting societies). As a
result, it should not be a practical problem in this area that
copyright-protected works are actually exclusively used for
teaching and not for entertainment or similar purposes.

Specific problems for right holders have particularly resulted
from the fact that for a long time, no agreement was reached
regarding general contracts between the public authorities as
the parties responsible for the schools and the collecting
societies.

We are not aware of a cross-border demand for the use of
copyright-protected works for teaching or of resulting
problems.

In individual cases, the use of e.g. films in the context of
schools but not explicitly for teaching purposes might lead to
a problem of demarcation. To the extent that an exploitation
act occurs, which is not privileged due to an exceptional rule,
there is no cause to exclude this from the individual licensing
obligation towards the right holder.

By now, in addition to the collecting societies, the private
market also contains providers (e.g. MPLC), which offer
licenses for specific exploitations (non-theatrical, non-TV) in
the commercial area, but also for schools and universities,
which are not included in the above-mentioned exception (see 42
(a)).

NO OPINION

If there are problems, how wouldtheybestbe solved?

[Open question]

Private offer exists!

By now, in addition to the collecting societies, the private
market also contains providers (e.g. MPLC), which offer
licenses for specific exploitations (non-theatrical, non-TV) in
the commercial area, but also for schools and universities,
which are not included in the above-mentioned exception (see
42).

What mechanisms exist in the market place to facilitate the use
of content for illustration for teaching purposes?How
successful are they?

[Open question]

We do not know of a single case in Austrian judicature in which
the use of AV content actually resulted in claims. Therefore,
some results might also only be constructed copyright problems.

In theory, e.g. the mash up of different media contents as
illustration e.g. in a moving image Powerpoint presentation
might lead to license problems; yet not a single case is know
in judicature where this actually resulted in claims.
Therefore, this might also only be a constructed copyright
problem.

If your view is that a legislative solution is needed, what
would be its main elements? Which activities of the beneficiary
institutions should be coveredand underwhatconditions?

[Open question]

Still exclusively for use for teaching purposes or for
scientific research and education purposes, as set out in
Austrian copyright law.

If your view is thatadifferent solutionisneeded, what would it
be?

[Open question]

Since Austrian copyright law contains an exception for the use
of copyright-protected works in teaching and education, a
further legal exception is not required.

Research
========

Directive 2001/29/EC47

Article 5(3)a of Directive 2001/29.

enables Member States to choose whether to implement in their
national laws a limitation for the purpose of non-commercial
scientific research.Theopenformulation of this (optional)
provision allows forratherdifferent implementationsat Member
States level.

(a)[In particular if you arean enduser/consumeror an
institutional user:]Haveyou experienced specific problems when
trying to use works or other subject matter in thecontextof
research projects/activities, including across borders?

(b)[In particular if you area right
holder:]Haveyouexperiencedspecificproblemsresulting from the
wayin whichworks or other subject-matter are usedin
thecontextof research projects/activities, including across
borders?

YES–Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

xNO

Please note the response given in the context of education. Both
schools and universities may use AV content for teaching and
education purposes to a justified extent; see Section 56 c of
the Austrian Copyright Act, which specifies provisions for film
works and related sound works regarding public performance. Only
collecting societies may claim a suitable compensation.

NO OPINION

If there are problems, how wouldtheybestbe solved?

[Open question]

Please note the response given in the context of education. Both
schools and universities may use AV content for teaching and
education purposes to a justified extent; see Section 56 c of
the Austrian Copyright Act, which specifies provisions for film
works and related sound works regarding public performance. Only
collecting societies may claim a suitable compensation.

What mechanisms exist in the Member States to facilitate the use
of content for research purposes?How successful are they?

[Open question]

Please note the response given in the context of education. Both
schools and universities may use AV content for teaching and
education purposes to a justified extent; see Section 56 c of
the Austrian Copyright Act, which specifies provisions for film
works and related sound works regarding public performance. Only
collecting societies may claim a suitable compensation.

Disabilities
============

Directive 2001/29/EC48

Article 5 (3)b of Directive 2001/29.

provides for an exception/limitation for the benefit of people
with a disability.The open formulation of this (optional)
provision allows for rather different implementationsat Member
States level.At EU and international level projects have been
launched to increase the accessibilityof works and other
subject-matterforpersons with disabilities (notably by
increasing the number of works published in special formats and
facilitating their distribution across the European Union)49

The European Trusted Intermediaries Network (ETIN)resulting
froma Memorandum of Understanding betweenrepresentatives of the
right-holder community (publishers, authors, collecting
societies) and interested parties such as associations for
blind and dyslexic
persons(http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/copyright/initiatives/access/index_en.htm)
and the Trusted Intermediary Global Accessible Resources (TIGAR)
project in WIPO (http://www.visionip.org/portal/en/).

.

The Marrakesh Treaty50

MarrakeshTreaty to Facilitate Access to Published Works by
Visually Impaired Persons and Persons with Print
Disabilities,Marrakesh, June 17 to 282013.

has been adopted to facilitate access to published works for
persons who are blind, visually impaired, or otherwise print
disabled. The Treaty creates a mandatory exception to copyright
that allows organisations for the blind to produce, distribute
and make available accessible format copies to visually
impaired persons without the authorisation of the rightholders.
The EU and its Member Stateshave startedwork to sign and ratify
the Treaty. This may require the adoption of certain provisions
at EU level (e.g. to ensure the possibility to exchange
accessible format copies across borders).

(a)[Inparticular if you are a person with a disability or an
organisation representing persons with disabilities:]Have you
experienced problems with accessibility to content, including
across borders,arising from Member States’ implementation of
this exception?

(b)[Inparticular if you are an organisationproviding services
for persons with disabilities:]Have you experienced problems
when distributing/communicating works published in special
formats across the EU?

(c)[In particular if you are arightholder:]Have you
experiencedspecificproblems resulting fromthe application of
limitations or exceptions allowing for the
distribution/communication of works published in special
formats, including across borders?

YES–Please explainby giving examples

xNO

Section 42 d of the Austrian Copyright Act contains a special
provision for disabled persons; according to this,
non-commercial use is permissible analogue to a use in
teaching. In this context, authors are entitled to appropriate
compensation, which only collecting societies may assert.

We are not aware of any special cross-border demand from this
user group, and such groups have also not formulated this
politically to this date. If there are problems or demand, then
this has a purely national focus and results from the fact that
a number of media can still not be accessed without barriers.
Both public channels and Austrian funding associations have
already responded to this by adapting the relevant guidelines.
We can only assume that the specific adaptations of film works
for the disabled focus even more strongly on the relevant
language versions, so that a cross-border demand of accessible
formats cannot be identified here.

By now, subtitling and audio description tools are available
both in cinemas and even more strongly on the home video
market. The copyright directive contains various provisions
also regarding access for disabled individuals, particularly
Section 5/3b, which in any case sets out a flexible access to
the different categories of copyright-protected works. A new,
separate, and above all mandatory condition can only prove to
be inflexible with regard to the technological changes, which
continually must be faced especially in the AV industry, and
fail to meet current and future user demands. Individual and
flexible contractual solutions are the best way to serve the
objective of better access to audiovisual contents for disabled
individuals, particularly because the interests of producers in
the film industry focus on reaching the biggest possible target
audience with its audiovisual content. Austrian funding
guidelines by now contain provisions, which obligate funding
institutions particularly in the home video market to make
disabled access versions available without barriers. The laws
regarding public and private televisions contain corresponding
provisions, so that the number of films available without
barriers will increase successively.

NO OPINION

Ifthere are problems, what could be done to improve
accessibility?

[Open question]

Section 42 d of the Austrian Copyright Act contains a special
provision for disabled persons; according to this,
non-commercial use is permissible analogue to a use in
teaching. In this context, authors are entitled to appropriate
compensation, which only collecting societies may assert.

We are not aware of any special cross-border demand from this
user group, and such groups have also not formulated this
politically to this date. If there are problems or demand, then
this has a purely national focus and results from the fact that
a number of media can still not be accessed without barriers.
Both public channels and Austrian funding associations have
already responded to this by adapting the relevant guidelines.
We can only assume that the specific adaptations of film works
for the disabled focus even more strongly on the relevant
language versions, so that a cross-border demand of accessible
formats cannot be identified here.

By now, subtitling and audio description tools are available
both in cinemas and even more strongly on the home video
market. The copyright directive contains various provisions
also regarding access for disabled individuals, particularly
Section 5/3b, which in any case sets out a flexible access to
the different categories of copyright-protected works. A new,
separate, and above all mandatory condition can only prove to
be inflexible with regard to the technological changes, which
continually must be faced especially in the AV industry, and
fail to meet current and future user demands. Individual and
flexible contractual solutions are the best way to serve the
objective of better access to audiovisual contents for disabled
individuals, particularly because the interests of producers in
the film industry focus on reaching the biggest possible target
audience with its audiovisual content. Austrian funding
guidelines by now contain provisions, which obligate funding
institutions particularly in the home video market to make
disabled access versions available without barriers. The laws
regarding public and private televisions contain corresponding
provisions, so that the number of films available without
barriers will increase successively.

What mechanisms exist in the market place to facilitate
accessibility to content? How successful are they?

[Open question]

Section 42 d of the Copyright Act contains a special provision
for disabled persons; according to this, non-commercial use is
permissible analogue to a use in teaching. In this context,
authors are entitled to appropriate compensation, which only
collecting societies may assert.

We are not aware of any special cross-border demand from this
user group, and such groups have also not formulated this
politically to this date. If there are problems or demand, then
this has a purely national focus and results from the fact that
a number of media can still not be accessed without barriers.
Both public channels and Austrian funding associations have
already responded to this by adapting the relevant guidelines.
We can only assume that the specific adaptations of film works
for the disabled focus even more strongly on the relevant
language versions, so that a cross-border demand of accessible
formats cannot be identified here.

By now, subtitling and audio description tools are available
both in cinemas and even more strongly on the home video
market. The copyright directive contains various provisions
also regarding access for disabled individuals, particularly
Section 5/3b, which in any case sets out a flexible access to
the different categories of copyright-protected works. A new,
separate, and above all mandatory condition can only prove to
be inflexible with regard to the technological changes, which
continually must be faced especially in the AV industry, and
fail to meet current and future user demands. Individual and
flexible contractual solutions are the best way to serve the
objective of better access to audiovisual contents for disabled
individuals, particularly because the interests of producers in
the film industry focus on reaching the biggest possible target
audience with its audiovisual content. Austrian funding
guidelines by now contain provisions, which obligate funding
institutions particularly in the home video market to make
disabled access versions available without barriers. The laws
regarding public and private televisions contain corresponding
provisions, so that the number of films available without
barriers will increase successively.

By now, funding institutions have specified a promotion of
measures for image media to promote an absence of barriers as a
condition for funding; public radio broadcasting is obligated as
a result of the Broadcasting Act to increase its proportion of
broadcasts without barriers, and to achieve this to a
reasonable extent in the next few years, Cinemas already offer
more and more access without barriers. But a 100% market
penetration for films without barriers does not apply.

Text and data mining
====================

Text and data mining/content mining/data analytics51

For the purpose of the present document, the term “text and data
mining” will be used.

are different terms used to describe increasingly important
techniques used in particular by researchers for the
exploration of vast amounts of existing texts and data (e.g.,
journals, web sites, databases etc.). Through the use of
software or other automated processes, an analysis is made of
relevant texts and data in order to obtain new insights,
patterns and trends.

The texts and data used for mining are either freely accessible
on the internet or accessible through subscriptions to e.g.
journals and periodicals that give access to the databases of
publishers. A copy is made of the relevant texts and data (e.g.
on browser cache memories or in computers RAM memories or onto
the hard disk of a computer), prior to the actual analysis.
Normally, it is considered that to mine protected works or
other subject matter, it is necessary to obtain authorisation
fromtherightholdersfor the making of such copiesunless such
authorisation can be implied (e.g. content accessible to
general public without restrictions on the internet,
openaccess).

Some argue that the copies required for text and data mining are
covered by the exception for temporary copies in Article 5.1 of
Directive 2001/29/EC. Others consider that text and data mining
activities should not even be seen as covered by copyright. None
of thisis clear, in particular since text and data mining does
not consist only of a single method, but can be undertaken in
several different ways. Important questions also remain as to
whether the main problems arising in relation to this issue go
beyond copyright (i.e. beyond the necessity or not to obtain
the authorisation to use content) and relate rather to the need
to obtain “access” to content (i.e. being able to use e.g.
commercial databases).

A specific Working Group was set up on this issue in the
framework of the "Licences for Europe" stakeholder dialogue. No
consensus was reached among participating stakeholders on either
the problems to be addressed or the results. At the same time,
practical solutions to facilitate text and data mining of
subscription-based scientific content were presented by
publishers as an outcome of “Licences for Europe”52

See the document “Licences for Europe – tenpledges to bring more
content
online”:http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/copyright/docs/licences-for-europe/131113_ten-pledges_en.pdf.

.In the context of these discussions, other stakeholders argued
that no additional licences should be required to mine material
to which access has been provided through a
subscriptionagreement and considered that a specific exception
for text and data mining should beintroduced, possibly on the
basis of a distinction between commercial and non-commercial.

(a)[In particular if you are an enduser/consumeror an
institutional user:]Haveyou experiencedobstacles,linked to
copyright,when trying to usetext or data miningmethods,
including across borders?

(b)[In particular if you are aservice provider:]Have you
experienced obstacles, linked to copyright, when providing
services based on text or data mining methods, including across
borders?

(c)[In particular if you are a rightholder:]Have you
experiencedspecificproblems resulting fromthe useof textand
data mining in relation to copyright protected content,
including across borders?

YES–Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO–Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO OPINION

If there are problems, how wouldtheybestbe solved?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

If your view is that a legislative solution is needed, what
would be its main elements? Which activities should be
coveredand underwhatconditions?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

If your view is thatadifferent solutionisneeded, what would it
be?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Are there other issues, unrelated to copyright, that constitute
barriers to the use of text or data mining methods?

[Open question]……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

User-generated content

Technological and service developments mean that citizens can
copy, use and distribute content at little to no financial
cost. As a consequence, new types of online activities are
developing rapidly, including the making of so-called
“user-generated content”. While users can create totally
original content,theycan also take one or several pre-existing
works, change somethinginthe work(s), and upload the result on
the Internet e.g. to platforms and blogs53

A typical example could be the “kitchen” or “wedding” video
(adding one's own video to a pre-existing sound recording), or
adding one's own text to a pre-existing photograph.Other
examples are “mash-ups” (blending two sound recordings), and
reproducing parts of journalistic work (report, review etc.) in
a blog.

. User-generated content (UGC) can thus coverthe modification of
pre-existing works even if the newly-generated/"uploaded" work
does notnecessarilyrequire a creative effort and results from
merely adding, subtracting or associating some pre-existing
content with other pre-existing content. This kind ofactivityis
not “new” as such. However, the development of social networking
and social media sitesthatenable users to share content widely
has vastly changed the scale of such activities and increased
the potential economic impact forthose holding rights inthe
pre-existing works. Re-use is no longer the preserve of
a technically and artistically adept elite. With the
possibilities offered by the new technologies,re-use is open to
all, at no cost.This in turn raises questionswith regard to
fundamental rights suchthe freedom of expression and theright
to property.

A specific Working Group was set up on this issue in the
framework of the"Licences for Europe" stakeholder dialogue. No
consensuswas reachedamong participating stakeholders on either
the problems tobe addressed or the resultsor even the
definition of UGC.Nevertheless, awide range of viewswere
presentedas to the best way to respond to this phenomenon.
Oneviewwasto say that a new exception is needed to cover UGC,in
particular non-commercial activities by individuals such as
combining existing musical works with videos, sequences of
photos, etc.Anotherview wasthat no legislative change is
needed: UGC is flourishing, and licensing schemes are
increasingly available (licence schemes concluded between
rightholders and platforms as well as micro-licences concluded
between rightholders and the usersgenerating thecontent. In any
event, practical solutions to ease user-generated content and
facilitate micro-licensing for small users werepledgedby
rightholders across different sectors as a result of the
“Licences for Europe” discussions54

See the document “Licences for Europe – tenpledges to bring more
content
online”:http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/copyright/docs/licences-for-europe/131113_ten-pledges_en.pdf.

.

(a)[In particular if you are an enduser/consumer:]Have you
experienced problems when trying to use pre-existing works or
other subject matter to disseminate new content on the
Internet, including across borders?

(b)[In particular if you are aservice provider:]Have you
experienced problems when users publish/disseminatenew content
based on the pre-existing works or other subject-matter through
your service, including across borders?

(c)[In particular if you are a right holder:]Have you
experiencedproblems resulting from the waythe usersare using
pre-existing works or other subject-matter to disseminate new
content on the Internet, including across borders?

YES – Please explain by giving examples

xNO

The EU body of rules for copyright is sufficiently flexible for
consumers to be able to generate content. By now, there are
various European and international options (YouTube) allowing
consumers to be creative themselves and to offer content
regionally and globally.

Discussions in the "Licenses for Europe" stakeholder dialogue
also treated user generated content separately in a working
group and determined that corresponding UCG services in Europe
work ideally and that as a result, the existing legal framework
obviously contains effective solutions also for this area. In
addition, numerous individual examples have shown that the
industry itself ensures greater flexibility in this area. One
remaining problem is the fact that the term 'user generated
content' has so far not been defined sufficiently. Especially
those areas must be identified where the interests of the
professional right holders clash with those of creative
consumers and where protected works are
presented/published/reproduced on content platforms in full or
in part. But the problem does not exist in the frequently
quoted examples of "mash-ups" - i.e. the combination of
protected content with more or less creative user generated
proportions - but in the fact that whole theatrical films, TV
series, filmed live concerts etc. can be found on such
platforms, which contain no or hardly any creative proportion
by the uploading user. They are simply legal violations and
unlicensed publication and reproduction acts of
copyright-protected content. It has not yet been possible to
find an exact demarcation here. Nevertheless, it is important
to clearly differentiate between uses where creative
proportions of non-professional, non-commercially acting
uploaders of content are mixed with proportions of protected
works, and contents which represent clear legal violations
andwhere the user does not provide an independent creative
performance. The latter is actually a problem.

From the perspective of the right holders: Even systems common
on the market, such as YouTube, again and again contain
non-licensed and neither individually licensed nor collectively
paid for exploitation acts of copyright-protected works; this
not only relates to the use as mash-ups in the context of user
generated content but very often whole films and music works.
General contract negotiations with the platforms are drawn-out
and cumbersome, and an intervention by the EU Commission to
regulate personal rights but also compensation rules is
urgently necessary. The mechanisms of online platforms to
remove copyright-protected content from the web or, even
better, not to allow it with the help of software, would have
to be strongly refined and are currently still unsatisfactory;
even platforms like YouTube, which remove contents, cannot
prevent them from being available online again shortly
afterwards. The responsibility of internet service providers,
particularly online content providers, must be demanded here.
In addition, solution mechanisms must be prescribed as
mandatory. The use of creative common licenses is a help in the
amateur and semi-professional areas, but far fails to cover the
complex legal relationships in the B2B area. In any case, there
is a need for a working mechanisms, which ensures that online
platforms do not profit from the rights violation. Even legal
platforms hesitate to use these mechanisms, which are
unsatisfactory.

Otherwise, "moral rights" (personal rights) questions, and not
only remuneration questions, are significant. Authors must
still be in command of their work and, if necessary, be able to
prevent it e.g. a use not in their interests (e.g. the use of
music or film for political purposes without the right holder's
approval).

NO OPINION

(a)[In particular if you are an end user/consumer or aright
holder:]Have you experienced problems when trying to ensure
that the work you have created (on the basis of pre-existing
works) is properly identified for online use?Are proprietary
systems sufficient in this context?

(b)[In particular if you are a service provider:]Do you provide
possibilities for users that are publishing/disseminating the
works they have created (on the basis of pre-existing works)
through your service to properly identify these works for
online use?

YES – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO OPINION

(a)[In particular if you are an enduser/consumeror aright
holder):]Have you experienced problems when trying to be
remunerated for the use of the work you have created (on the
basis of pre-existing works)?

(b)[In particular if you are a service provider:]Do you provide
remuneration schemes for users publishing/disseminating the
works they have created (on the basis of pre-existing works)
through your service?

YES – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO OPINION

If there are problems, how would theybestbe solved?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

If your view is that a legislative solution is needed, what
would be its main elements? Which activities should be
coveredand underwhatconditions?

[Open question]

It must of course be possible to prevent all copyright
exploitation acts, which violate the 3-step test and thus
interfere with the right holder's retention rights in terms of
personal and property rights, and payment for them must be
ensured. It must be noted that many online platforms are not
refinanced from the licensing of works; this means that this
platforms - even if they themselves do not immediately violate
copyright law - generate profits from the copyright violations
of others via the click rate and from resulting advertising
attractiveness. Currently, major problems in the online area
result not just from remuneration and licensing problems
regarding the fee paid to the artists, but above all from the
lack of an obligation of the new media to contribute to the
financing of works in the online area.

If your view is thatadifferent solutionisneeded, what would it
be?

[Open question]

The lack of an obligation of the new media to contribute to the
financing of works in the online area is a discrimination
against traditional media, which are normally either obligated
by legal measures to contribute to the production of European
contents, do so voluntarily (in Austria e.g. the ORF Film/TV
agreement with the Austrian Film Institute to co-produce
theatrical films) or are obligated by a public channel
obligation to also broadcast specific European programs (see
AVMS Dir.).

Private copying and reprography

Directive 2001/29/EC enables Member States to implement in their
national legislation exceptions or limitations to the
reproduction right for copies made for private useand
photocopying55

Article 5. 2)(a) and (b)of Directive 2001/29.

.Levies are charges imposed at national level on goods typically
used forsuch purposes(blank media, recording equipment,
photocopying machines, mobile listening devices such as mp3/mp4
players, computers, etc.) with a viewtocompensating rightholders
forthe harm they suffer whencopiesaremade
withouttheirauthorisation by certain categories of persons
(i.e. natural persons making copies for their private use)
orthroughuse of certain technique (i.e. reprography).In that
context, levies are importantforrightholders.

With the constant developments in digital technology, the
question arises as to whether the copying of files
byconsumers/end-userswho have purchasedcontent online -e.g.
when a person has bought an MP3 fileandgoes on
tostoremultiplecopies of thatfile(in her computer, her tablet
and her mobile phone)-alsotriggers, or should trigger,the
application of private copying levies. It is argued that, in
some cases,these leviesmay indeedbe claimedby
rightholderswhetheror notthelicence feepaid by the service
provideralready covers copies made bythe enduser.
Thisapproachcould potentially lead to instances of double
payments whereby levies could be claimed on top ofservice
providers’licencefees56

Communication "Unleashing the Potential of Cloud Computing in
Europe", COM(2012) 529 final.

57

These issues were addressed in the recommendations of Mr António
Vitorino resulting from the mediation on private copying and
reprography levies.Youcan consult these recommendationson the
following
website:http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/copyright/docs/levy_reform/130131_levies-vitorino-recommendations_en.pdf.

.

There is also an on-going discussion as to the application or
not of levies to certain types ofcloud-based services such as
personal lockers or personal video recorders.

In your view, is there a need to clarifyat the EU levelthe scope
and application of theprivate copyingand reprographyexceptions58

Art. 5.2(a) and 5.2(b) of Directive 2001/29/EC.

in the digital environment?

YES–Please explain

xNO–Please explain

Section 5.2 b of the copyright directive contains the condition
that under certain circumstances, private copies are governed
by the exception rule, such as private use, non-commercial use
and above all a fair compensation for the benefit of the right
holder. A specific reference relates to private copies, which a
natural person can create for private use. From this results the
rule that copies for a third party are not covered by the
private copy exception according to Section 5.2 b. In addition,
the ECJ has by now also confirmed(C-467/08 – Padawan, C-462/09 –
Opus, C-457/11 – Kyocera, C-521/11).that private copies may only
be made of the legal source; the exception rule in Section 5.2 b
does not cover private copies of an illegal source. Whenever the
argument is put forward that private copies online cannot be
controlled, it must be countered that especially the digital
distribution of copyright protected works can be effectively
protected by technological measures on the internet. Controls
and payment processes, but also exploitations specifically
tailored to the needs of the consumers are even more easily
possible online than in the analogue area. This not only
provides right holders and users with a variety of options for
specific exploitations, but also gives consumers a greater
choice with an offer focused on their needs.

Regulations regarding copyright fees vary greatly in the
different EU member states; both in terms of content and
amount, which can be completely justified given different
circumstances. In Austria, the incorporation of storage media
plays a greater and greater role - supplementing "conventional"
media such as CDs, DVDs etc. -, which are increasingly relevant
to the storage and exploitation of audiovisual content. Failure
to include storage on PCs, pads, mobiles, netbooks etc., which
is substituting analogue media, has resulted in the
remuneration of right holders through collective societies
suffering a drastic reduction in the last years (50% for social
and cultural institutions in Austria in only 5 years).

Again and again, reference is made to the cloud in discussions
about copyright fees. Legal copies in the cloud are undoubtedly
licensed copies and therefore not a basis for justifying
additional copyright fees. Representatives on the copyright
side have never disputed this. Even for copies acquired
legally, there are sufficient options for private copy
processes, which provide additional use for consumers, impact
on exploitations and as a result is easily subject to the fair
remuneration rule.

In Austria, the Austrian Supreme Court ruled only recently in
the matter of Hewlett Packard vs. Austro Mechana on 17 December
2013 that a fair compensation for the private copy exception of
copyright protected works must also be applied to
multifunctional storage media, such as hard drivers, tablets or
PCs. The ASC clarified unmistakably that a fair compensation for
private copies also applies to storage media under the condition
that it can be shown that the right holders' rights are violated
to more than just a minimal extent. Given the extent of digital
use of copyright protected works extant in practice, the ASC
states in contrast to its previous judicature (Gericom vs.
Austro Mechana) that technological developments by now clearly
exceed a "minimal damage" of the right holder, so that a
compensation would also be permissible and justified for
storage media. In this respect, the ASC referred back to the
court of first instance to clarify specific detailed questions,
such as an evaluation of the figures provided by the collective
societies regarding damage. Austrian right holders saw this
ruling as an important signal, and prompted the recently
appointed Federal Government to find a quick solution and to
integrated storage media into the private copy exception of
Section 42 b of the Austrian Copyright Act.

NO OPINION

Should digital copies made by end users for private purposes in
the context of a service that has been licensed by
rightholders, and where theharmto the rightholder is minimal,
be subject to private copying levies?59

This issue was also addressed in the recommendations of Mr
Antonio Vitorino resulting from the mediation on private
copying and reprography levies

 YES – Please explain

xNO – Please explain

The question is clearly based on a misunderstanding: So long as
a product is legally licensed for several platforms anyway, an
additional copyright fee cannot be requested. Neither do
copyright fees serve the purpose of rehabilitating copy
processes from an illegal source. However, legally digitally
acquired content is still copied often enough (e.g. back copy
on analogue media such as DVDs) and thus serve security
purposes or simply to increase the comfort of the user(e.g.
EUGH C-607/11 – TVCatchUp). It is precisely these last reasons
which justify copyright fees as they exist now. The problem of
actually using multifunctional devices, in contrast to common
analogue media, is possible via consumer surveys etc., and e.g.
in Austria is used quite successfully for reproduction fees.

 NO OPINION

How wouldchanges inlevieswith respect to the application
toonline services (e.g.services based oncloud computing
allowing, for instance,usersto have copieson different
devices)impactthe development and functioning ofnewbusiness
modelson the one hand and rightholders’ revenue on the other?

[Open question]

New business models should also not be developed at the expense
of third parties, which is de facto the case online - see web
piracy. It is a fact that the remuneration of right holders
suffers as a result, as demonstrated clearly by the reduction
in income of collecting societies, based on blank tape fees.

The popular cloud computing argument does not apply here,
because this also only relates to saving and copying processes
on servers, which are generally located outside the borders of
the relevant member state. Legal measures have not yet been
developed here. Since the existing system of copyright fees
also starts with the "importer", it should be possible -
assuming political willingness - to subject saving processes
outside one's own member state to a fee using bilateral
agreements - and that is precisely what cloud computing is. To
the extent that the relevant individual license enables the use
of content on different media or devices, no copyright fee
obligation applies in this context. The no doubt dynamically
growing extent of such multifunctional licenses must be taken
into account when setting the fee amount.

Would you see an added value in making levies visibleon the
invoices for products subject to levies?60

This issue was also addressed in the recommendations of Mr
Antonio Vitorino resulting from the mediation on private
copying and reprography levies.

xYES–Please explain

There is no reason not to make the fees transparent. The
industry is not against transparency! But a need for an
explicit regulation is also not identified.

NO–Please explain

NO OPINION

Divergingnational systems levy different products and apply
different tariffs. This results in obstacles tothefree
circulation of goods and servicesin the Single Market.At the
same time, many Member States continue to
allowtheindiscriminate application of private copying levies to
all transactions irrespective of the person to whom the product
subject to a levyis sold(e.g. private person or business). In
that context, not all Member States have ex ante exemption
and/orex post reimbursement schemes which could remedy these
situations and reduce the number of undue payments61

This issue was also addressed in the recommendations of Mr
Antonio Vitorino resulting from the mediation on private
copying and reprography levies.

.

Have you experienced a situation whereacross-border transaction
resulted inundue levy payments, or duplicate payments of the
same levy, or other obstacles to the free movement of goods or
services?

YES–Pleasespecify the type of transaction and indicate
thepercentageoftheundue payments. Please also indicatehowa
priori exemption and/orex post reimbursement schemes could help
to remedy the situation.

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO–Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO OPINION

What percentage of products subject to a levy is sold to persons
other than natural persons for purposes clearly unrelated to
private copying? Do any of those transactions result in undue
payments? Please explain in detail the example you provide
(type of products, type of transaction, stakeholders, etc.).

[Open question]

Evidently, there is a three-way split. One third for private
purposes, one third for commercial purposes and one third for
use by schools, universities and institutions (estimate!).

Where such undue payments arise, what percentage of trade do
they affect? To what extent could a priori exemptionsand/orex
post reimbursement schemes existingin some Member Stateshelp to
remedy the situation?

[Open question]

In Austria, there is the option of getting back copyright fees
ex post. Commercial companies also make use of this option.

Ifyou have identified specificproblemswith the
currentfunctioning of thelevy system, howwouldthese
problemsbestbesolved?

[Open question]

In Austria, there were also discussions in the industry of
excluding commercial companies from the payment obligation a
priori. In the end, retail itself did not view such an option
as feasible from the point of view of administration. The fact
that someone obtains commercial blank media does not mean that
he uses them commercially, and the avoidance options for the
payment obligation are numerous. Within the industries, the
present system is therefore also considered to be the best
based on its principles, even though retail repeatedly mentions
the high administration effort of reclaiming. But there is no
evidence for this, and in legal teaching describes the Austrian
system of repayment as exemplary (Prof. Walter c.o.).

Fairremuneration of authors and performers

TheEUcopyrightacquisrecognises for authors and performers a
number of exclusive rights and, in the case of performers whose
performances are fixed in phonograms, remuneration rights. There
are few provisions in the EU copyright law governing
thetransferof rights from authors or performers to producers62

See e.g. Directive 92/100/EEC, Art.2(4)-(7).

or determining who the owner of the rights is when the work or
other subject matter is created in the context ofanemployment
contract63

See e.g.Art. 2.3. of Directive 2009/24/EC,Art. 4 of Directive
96/9/EC.

.Thisis an area that has been traditionally left for Member
States to regulate and there are significant differences in
regulatory approaches.Substantial differences also existbetween
differentsectors ofthecreative industries.

Concerns continue to be raised that authors and performers are
not adequately remunerated, in particularbut not solely, as
regards online exploitation. Many consider that the economic
benefit of new forms of exploitation is not being fairly shared
along the whole value chain. Another commonly raised issue
concerns contractual practices, negotiation mechanisms,
presumptions of transfer of rights, buy-out clauses and the
lack of possibility to terminate contracts. Some stakeholders
are of the opinion that rules atnational leveldonotsuffice to
improve their situation and that action at EU level is
necessary.

[In particular if you arean author/performer:] What is the best
mechanism (or combination of mechanisms) to ensurethatyou
receive an adequate remuneration for the exploitation of your
works and performances?

[Open question]

The remuneration of right holders is an important discussion
point - not only as regards the question how potential
exploitation income from the audiovisual value chain of online
media is handled.Incidentally, it is unclear why
authors/performers and not the industry (=producers/lending
companies) are asked this question since questions relating to
remuneration of course also particularly come up in the
relationship between authors/performers and the film economy
(industry).

In terms of online media, this is not a relevant question in
Austria because there is no verifiable, relevant income;
nevertheless, the question of the authors' share of profits
from second and third-hand exploitation author contract
provisions are a constant area of conflict also in Austrian
discussions, to which we will refer later on. Generally, any
future harmonising policies must in any case be based on a
clear argumentation that the holders of audiovisual rights
receive a fair remuneration. Here, the status quo must be
considered: Right holders/film makers are paid their fee - such
as as a combination of buy out systems, compulsory minimum fees,
rights fee from legal collective agreements (in Austria this
comes from blank media fees and cable and satellite
exploitation) as well as from income from rights, which in
practice is agreed individually as part of contractual freedom.
In Austria, there is at least statistical evidence for this, and
there are highly relevant rights participations held by
directors (in one case up to 50% of income). The existing legal
situation favours the film-making creative parties, but to the
extent that they - different to the producer or lender - are
mandatorily paid in advance as service providers irrespective
of exploitation income and they are entitled to further income
from second and third-hand exploitation. Mandatory obligations,
especially to the extent that they relate to the online area,
which is still developing dynamically, can put a sensitive
balance of minimum income based on collective agreements,
voluntary agreements, and legal claims at risk, and can put the
already fragile situation of online exploitation at risk
(particularly in small markets!) - i.e. a counter-productive
effect. Since in many areas, online exploitations barely create
a relevant return for producers, the question of distribution is
irrelevant. The real challenge lies in a policy, which the
online market can develop further and which obligates online
platforms to finance productions and project development
themselves. A broad return on investment can then be realised,
which benefits everyone in the end - including authors and
performers. If an additional right to remuneration from online
exploitations were specified at EU level, - e.g. in the shape
of a mandatory collective remuneration -, this would directly
weaken online distribution service providers, which tend to be
economically weak especially in smaller countries. It would
also reduce the value of rights for online distribution and in
addition would discriminate against traditional exploitation
media in favour of online media, as these often (must) invest
in film production.

In general, using legal provisions to force right holders into
collective licenses should be avoided, unless specific examples
provide good reasons for this (such as the blank media fee and
cable retransmission in Austria). On EU level, the list of film
authors is set out in the 2006/116 directive, which in any case
accepts the main director as the film's author. It is likely
that this rule is implemented differently in many member
states. For example, the list of film authors is flexible in
Germany and Austria and is defined based on the degree of
creative influence on the film work. It could therefore also
view other departments as film authors. There is no exhaustive
list. The question of a harmonising mandatory rule would
therefore automatically pose the question which film authors
profit from mandatory remuneration.

In Austria, the ECJ also commented on the cessio legis question
regarding the mandatory exploitation of the film work in Luksan
vs. Van der Let in 2012. Based on this, it is also undisputed
according to the ECJ that the main director is entitled to an
appropriate remuneration in any case. The ECJ did not make a
statement regarding the amount, which appropriateness describes
here, so that we can assume that the combination of direct
licensing, collective individual fee, and above all the
collective minimum fees suitably ensure such appropriate fees.
In contrast to other EU states, a special situation applies in
Austria that minimum wages according to collective agreements
apply as legal provisions, which specify legally binding rights
and obligations for both all film producers and for film makers.
This mechanism ensures that all film maker receive an
appropriate fee. A supplementary percentage share (such as
vaguely stipulated in German law but not yet presented before
the Supreme Court) would put this mechanism at risk or in any
case have a negative impact on the agreed minimum fee rates.
Given the differentiates economic situation of the Austrian
film industry, this would undoubtedly not be beneficial for
film makers. In addition, surveys show that a not insignificant
part (at least for theatrical productions) does allow accepted
authors (directors, sometimes also camera) to obtain a share of
income. Since every film work must be assessed individually
regarding its exploitation potential, the contractual freedom
in Austrian law does provide sufficient space for finding
adequate solutions.

Istherea need to actat theEU level (for instance to prohibit
certain clauses in contracts)?

YES–Please explain

xNO–Please explainwhy

The remuneration of right holders is an important discussion
point - not only as regards the question how potential
exploitation income from the audiovisual value chain of online
media is handled. In terms of online media, this is not a
relevant question in Austria because there is no verifiable,
relevant income; nevertheless, the question of the authors'
share of profits from second and third-hand exploitation author
contract provisions are a constant area of conflict also in
Austrian discussions, to which we will refer later on.
Generally, any future harmonising policies must in any case be
based on a clear argumentation that the holders of audiovisual
rights receive a fair remuneration. Here, the status quo must
be considered: Right holders/film makers are paid their fee -
such as as a combination of buy out systems, compulsory minimum
fees, rights fee from legal collective agreements (in Austria
this comes from blank media fees and cable and satellite
exploitation) as well as from income from rights, which in
practice is agreed individually as part of contractual freedom.
In Austria, there is at least statistical evidence for this, and
there are highly relevant rights participations held by
directors (in one case up to 50% of income). The existing legal
situation favours the film-making creative parties, but to the
extent that they - different to the producer or lender - are
mandatorily paid in advance as service providers irrespective
of exploitation income and they are entitled to further income
from second and third-hand exploitation. Mandatory obligations,
especially to the extent that they relate to the online area,
which is still developing dynamically, can put a sensitive
balance of minimum income based on collective agreements,
voluntary agreements, and legal claims at risk, and can put the
already fragile situation of online exploitation at risk
(particularly in small markets!) - i.e. a counter-productive
effect. Since in many areas, online exploitations barely create
a relevant return for producers, the question of distribution is
irrelevant. The real challenge lies in a policy, which the
online market can develop further and which obligates online
platforms to finance productions and project development
themselves. A broad return on investment can then be realised,
which benefits everyone in the end - including authors and
performers. If an additional right to remuneration from online
exploitations were specified at EU level, - e.g. in the shape
of a mandatory collective remuneration -, this would directly
weaken online distribution service providers, which tend to be
economically weak especially in smaller countries. It would
also reduce the value of rights for online distribution and in
addition would discriminate against traditional exploitation
media in favour of online media, as these often (must) invest
in film production.

In general, using legal provisions to force right holders into
collective licenses should be avoided, unless specific examples
provide good reasons for this (such as the blank media fee and
cable retransmission in Austria). On EU level, the list of film
authors is set out in the 2006/116 directive, which in any case
accepts the main director as the film's author. It is likely
that this rule is implemented differently in many member
states. For example, the list of film authors is flexible in
Germany and Austria and is defined based on the degree of
creative influence on the film work. It could therefore also
view other departments as film authors. There is no exhaustive
list. The question of a harmonising mandatory rule would
therefore automatically pose the question which film authors
profit from mandatory remuneration.

In Austria, the ECJ also commented on the cessio legis question
regarding the mandatory exploitation of the film work in Luksan
vs. Van der Let in 2012. Based on this, it is also undisputed
according to the ECJ that the main director is entitled to an
appropriate remuneration in any case. The ECJ did not make a
statement regarding the amount, which appropriateness describes
here, so that we can assume that the combination of direct
licensing, collective individual fee, and above all the
collective minimum fees suitably ensure such appropriate fees.
In contrast to other EU states, a special situation applies in
Austria that minimum wages according to collective agreements
apply as legal provisions, which specify legally binding rights
and obligations for both all film producers and for film makers.
This mechanism ensures that all film maker receive an
appropriate fee. A supplementary percentage share (such as
vaguely stipulated in German law but not yet presented before
the Supreme Court) would put this mechanism at risk or in any
case have a negative impact on the agreed minimum fee rates.
Given the differentiates economic situation of the Austrian
film industry, this would undoubtedly not be beneficial for
film makers. In addition, surveys show that a not insignificant
part (at least for theatrical productions) does allow accepted
authors (directors, sometimes also camera) to obtain a share of
income. Since every film work must be assessed individually
regarding its exploitation potential, the contractual freedom
in

Austrian law does provide sufficient space for finding adequate
solutions.

NO OPINION

Ifyou consider that the current rules are not effective, what
would you suggest to addresstheshortcomingsyou identify?

[Open question]

In locations where films cannot be produced and people cannot be
employed, even the best mandatory remuneration system is
useless. Fair remuneration means neither basic security nor a
basic income! It assumes a contractual relationship and that
films are produced and used, as well as that the relevant
income streams are generated to secure the sustainability of
the economic sector.

There is no need for a mandatory regulation. The combination of
agreed minimum wages, specific remuneration by collecting
societies on a collective basis, which in exceptional cases is
prescribed by law, and the option to agree income from multiple
exploitation as part of contractual freedom, is fully
sufficient.

Actually existing precarious situations between film makers
result from causes, which could also not be removed with an
obligatory remuneration for specific uses. Here, solutions
might e.g. be found on the level of social security law.
Neither mandatory remuneration nor higher minimum fees can
prevent many film makers and producers from finding themselves
in precarious economic circumstances. Reasons for this include
e.g. the excessive offer of film making professions for the
next generation, the limited exploitation options in the
closing "exploitation bottleneck" cinema and the falling film
funding budget. In locations where films cannot be produced and
people cannot be employed, even the best mandatory remuneration
system is useless. Fair remuneration means neither basic
security nor a basic income! It assumes a contractual
relationship and that films are produced and used, as well as
that the relevant income streams are generated to secure the
sustainability of the economic sector.

Respectforrights

Directive 2004/48/EE64

Directive 2004/48/EC of the European Parliament and of the
Council of 29 April 2004 on the enforcement of intellectual
property rights.

provides for a harmonised framework for the civil enforcement of
intellectual property rights, including copyright and related
rights. The Commission has consulted broadly on this text65

You will find more information on the following
website:http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/iprenforcement/directive/index_en.htm

. Concerns have been raised as to whether some of its provisions
are still fit to ensure a proper respectforcopyright in the
digital age. On the one hand, the current measures seem to be
insufficient to deal with the new challenges brought by the
dissemination of digital content on the internet; on the other
hand, there are concerns about the current balance between
enforcement of copyright and the protection of fundamental
rights, in particular the right for a private life and data
protection. While it cannot be contested that enforcement
measures should always be available in caseofinfringement of
copyright, measures could be proposed to strengthen respect for
copyright when the infringed content is used for a commercial
purpose66

For example when the infringing content is offered on a website
which gets advertising revenues that depend on the volume of
traffic.

. One means to do this could be to clarify the role of
intermediaries in the IP infrastructure67

This clarification should not affect the liability regime of
intermediary service providers established by Directive
2000/31/EC on electronic commerce, which will remain unchanged.

. At the same time,there could beclarification of the
safeguardsforrespect of private life and data protection for
private users.

Shouldthe civil enforcement system in the EU be rendered more
efficient for infringements of copyright committed with a
commercial purpose?

xYES–Please explain

What is "commercial"? The European Charter of Human Rights and
International Copyright Law demands effective legal protection
regardless of the commercial purpose.

A distinction is made in the legal consequences in that e.g in
Austria, commercial copyright violations can have consequences
under criminal law, whereas punishment in the non-commercial
area is generally only under civil law.

Otherwise, we refer yet again to the importance of personal
rights. When they are violated, it is irrelevant whether the
purpose is commercial or non-commercial.NO–Please explain

NO OPINION

In particular,isthe current legal framework clear enough to
allow forsufficient involvement of intermediaries (such as
Internet service providers, advertising brokers, payment
service providers, domain name registrars, etc.) in inhibiting
online copyright infringements with a commercial purpose? If
not, whatmeasureswould be useful to foster the cooperation of
intermediaries?

[Open question]

The current system is rightly based on the co-responsibility of
internet providers (Section 8.3 InfoSoc). In Austria, the legal
means to assert rights are limited because, in implementing the
data preservation guideline and a Supreme Court ruling based on
this, strict data protection regulations make it nearly
impossible to identify individuals who upload or download
copyright protected materials - be it commercially or
"privately".

ISPs are key players in making copyright protected content
available directly or indirectly, and profit from this directly
or indirectly (e.g advertising).

Preventing direct income streams benefiting illegally acting
individuals/online platforms is a task to which ISPs and the
advertising industry must therefore also dedicate themselves.

Does the current civil enforcement framework ensure that the
right balance is achieved between the right to have one’s
copyright respected and other rights such as the
protectionofprivate life and protection of personal data?

xYES–Please explain

The judicature of the ECJ provides elaborate clear guidelines
for national jurisprudence, which ensures that all interested
parties involved and, if relevant, any "competing" basic rights
are sufficiently taken into account.

NO–Please explain

NO OPINION

AsingleEU CopyrightTitle

The idea ofestablishing aunifiedEU CopyrightTitlehas
beenpresentin the copyright debate for quite some time
now,although views as to the merits andthefeasibility of suchan
objectiveare divided.Aunified EUCopyrightTitlewouldtotally
harmonise the area of copyright law in the EU and replace
national laws. There would then be a single EU title instead of
a bundle of national rights.Some seethisas the only manner in
which a truly Single Market for content protected by copyright
can be ensured,whileothersbelieve that the same
objectivecanbetterbe achieved by establishing a higher level of
harmonisation while allowing for a certain degree of flexibility
and specificity in Member States’legal systems.

ShouldtheEU pursue the establishment of asingle
EUCopyrightTitle,as a means of establishing a consistent
framework for rights and exceptions to copyright across the EU,
as well as a single framework for enforcement?

YES

xNO

There is no need for a mandatory EU copyright. The Berne
Convention rightly stipulates the formlessness of such a
copyright. Creating a specific EU copyright, which incidentally
is not defined more closely here regarding the rights involved,
contradicts this principle and undermines subsidiarity in the
cultural area.

NO OPINION

Should this be the next step in the development of copyright in
the EU? Does the current level of difference among the Member
State legislation mean that this is a longer term project?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Other issues

The above questionnaire aimstoprovidea comprehensive
consultation on the most important matters relating to the
current EU legal framework for copyright.Shouldany important
matters have been omitted,we would appreciate if you could
bring them to our attention, so they can be properly addressed
in the future.

Are there any other important matters related to the EU legal
framework forcopyright?Pleaseexplainandindicatehow such matters
should be addressed.

[Open question]

a) Assertion of copyright claims also in the online area

b) Contribution of financing for production and development also
from the new media players in the online area

c) Regulation against the oligopoly of individual, especially
American platforms, on the European market. It is precisely
these platforms that must meet their responsibility towards
European content.

e) Creative Europe: Creating specific funding (e.g. for audience
building) for specific European online initiatives, online
platforms with European content or national online platforms
with a European focus

f) Effecting European ratings for non-linear media

g) Co-responsibility of the online industry in battling
copyright violations (key term: provider liability) and
restricting buying options for illegal online offers through
advertising

h) Bundling of rights with the producer also for TV channels,
e.g. reversion of rights in the interest of archive
exploitation

