


Public Consultation

on the review of the EU copyright rules

Please identify yourself:

Name:

Ray Corrigan

Senior Lecturer in Maths Computing &Technology, The Open
University, UK

(This submission is in a personal capacity and not on behalf of
my employer) …………………………………………………………………………………………………..

Type of respondent(Pleaseunderlinethe appropriate):

End user/consumer(e.g. internet user, reader,subscriber to music
or audiovisual service, researcher, student)

for the purposes of this questionnaire normally referred to
in questions as"end users/consumers"

Author

Other(Please explain):

Academic author and educator with interest in copyright

Rights and the functioning of the Single Market

Why is it not possible to access many online content services
from anywhere in Europe?[The territorial scope of the rights
involved in digital transmissions and the segmentation of the
market through licensing agreements]

[In particular if you are an end user/consumer:]Have you faced
problems when trying to access online services in an EU Member
State other than the one in which you live?

 YES

Yes. Receiving Irish public broadcasts e.g. from RTE radioand
television in the UK. I've also had problems getting Polish
books in Ireland and the UK. The lack of access to content in
their native language is a particular issue for the large
number of migrants all across the EU.

[In particular if you are a service provider:]Have you faced
problems when seeking to provide online services across borders
in the EU?

 I'm not a service provider but my academic blog
athttp://b2fxxx.blogspot.co.uk/is often censored or
mis-categorised by software filters; sometimes making it
awkward for people not just around the EU but also in the UK to
access. Notably the Orange mobile network has in the past
blocked my access to my own blog as have a number of other
corporate software filters. For several years Yahoo! search
tagged my blog with a “warning: dangerous downloads” label.

[In particular if you are a right holder or a collective
management organisation:]How often are you asked to grant
multi-territorial licences? Please indicate, if possible, the
number of requests per year and provide examples indicating the
Member State, the sector and the type of content concerned.

[Open question]

N/A

If you have identified problems in the answers to any of the
questions above – what would be the best way to tackle them?

[Open question]

There are three main parties with a stake in the copyright pie:

Creators

Agents (and I use the term in the economic sense here tocover
all the commercial entities involved in the copyright arena
e.g. music, film, software, media companies, publishers etc.)

And society as a whole (also known as the general public or
consumers)

Each of the three sets of stakeholders overlap to some degree
and will have within them a massive range of different kinds of
creators, businesses or consumers – all of which will havetheir
own demands of the copyright system – but for simplicity sake I
am just going to look at the three groups.

Whatever commercial, regulatory and technical systems are put in
place to evolve copyright in a way thatincreases the
cross-border availability of content services, theymusttake
account of the diverse interests of all three sets of generic
stakeholders. Balancing theneeds of these diverse groups is a
complex calculus, too often neglected. The historical result
has been badly designed regulations, falsely promoted as
protecting the interests of creators but in reality tailored to
the desires of existing large commercial players in the content
industries. The periodically repeated extension of copyright
term is the classic example in the EU but particularly in the
US.

Copyright is too often shaped as a tool for an elite group of
powerful economic agents (industry players) to extract all the
available commercial value from creative works, even when that
means uses previously deemed legal are handed over to the
control of these agents. Yet the function of copyright is not
purely to provide economic rent for commercial intermediaries
but also to provide an economic incentive to creators and to
contribute to the welfare of society as a whole.

The problem is that there is very little empirical evidence
available on copyright and intellectual property policy-making
more generally to inform such regulation. And the studies that
are available are often contradictory. So before we make any
more rules written or shaped by the best funded industry
lobbyists we must start gathering a sound empirical evidence
base. The kind of work being done by the UK Research Council's
CREATe initiative in partnership with the UK Intellectual
Property Office, amongst others.1

CREATe is the RCUK centre for copyright and new business models
in the creative economy.http://www.create.ac.uk/

Too often copyright regulations are shaped by what dominant
incumbent industries want rather than the balanced interests of
creators, economic agents and society as a whole, based on
empirical evidence. You can argue about the relative importance
of the three different sets of stakeholders but the needs of all
three must be accounted for.

[In particular if you are a right holder or a collective
management organisation:]Are there reasons why, even in cases
where you hold all the necessary rights for all the territories
in question, you would still find it necessary or justified to
impose territorial restrictions on a service provider (in
order, for instance, to ensure that access to certain content
is not possible in certain European countries)?

 NO

[Inparticular if you are e.g. a broadcaster or a service
provider:]Are there reasons why, even in cases where you have
acquired all the necessary rights for all the territories in
question, you would still find it necessary or justified to
impose territorialrestrictions on the service recipient (in
order for instance, to redirect the consumer to a different
website than the one he is trying to access)?

 NO

Do you think that further measures (legislative or
non-legislative, including market-led solutions) are needed at
EU level to increase the cross-border availability of content
services in the Single Market, while ensuring an adequate level
of protection for right holders?

 YES

See my answer to question 4 above and note the needs of the 3
sets of stakeholders – creators, economic agents and society as
a whole.

As to what these measures should be, we are woefully short of
the sound empirical evidence we need to figure this out and
need vastly more investment in gathering, researching and
analysing such evidence.

I would suggest that given the dominant position of large
oligopolies controllingintellectual property rights based on
territorial licensing of popular sports, for example, that the
current regulatory regime, coupled with a purely market led
approach, is unsatisfactory. It leads to a few winners – the
richest sports stars and/teams and economic agents like BSkyB –
and other stakeholders – sports people, other creators, other
economic agents who would like to provide wider access to
sports, and consumers, the public and society as a whole –
losing out relatively speaking.

Consider the breaking down of territorial barriers to facilitate
increased cross border availability of cross border content
services or expanding copyright exceptions more
generally.Consider the case of the sale of a new work, whether
music, film, software orother creative work. The economic
damage to creators or agents that own the copyright from an
increase in copyright exceptions or easier cross-border
availability must come from:

a) a reduction in revenue of the specific work, either now or in
the future

and, if this is positive,

b) a ‘dynamic effect’ whereby the lost sales now affect the
ability to generate new work in the future and thereby revenues
in the future.

It is clearthat only if a) occurs that b) can have validity.
Also, criterion a) is solely concerned with how current and
future revenue is influenced by copyright exceptions.

Some commentators define an additional type of ‘economic damage’
that

relates to previoussales of copyrighted goods . The argument
here is that improvements in technology (e.g. the iPod) allow
consumers to gain more value from their existing purchases of
music, films, etc. However, labelling this as ‘economic damage’
is a shift away from

normal economic analysis and the normal functioning of markets.
Whilst retrospective compensation is commonplace in the
copyright system, for example with retrospective term
extensions, the market system does not generally provide for
retrospective compensationbased on how technology has enabled
new uses.

Some commentators also note that increasing copyright exceptions
may not have only detrimental effects. For example, it is
sometimes suggested that format-shifting may allow others to
hear, see or play the work. This may, in turn, generate more
revenue either now or in the future. Similarly, the wider
exposure that format-shifting, parody or user-generated content
creates may also increase sales. Increased sales can come from
either primary sales of the work,or so-called secondary sales
(such as tickets for live concerns, merchandise, etc). And in
the case of cross-border access the societal value eg of
migrants having access to copyrighted content from their home
territories is incalculable.

In general, whena consumer buys a CD, or any product, we assume
they include in their valuation an estimate of the entire
benefits derived from the CD. This includes listening to the CD
now, next week and next year, as well as listening to it with
friends and family, format-shifting (if legal) and benefits
from new technologies in the future.

At any point in time, any specific product will receive a wide
range of ‘valuations’, as consumers are heterogeneous.
Economists summarise these valuations into a demand curve, as
for a specific product. The market price is determined by a
variety of factors, including the

competition in the market for the specific product (e.g. the
price of similar music or software).

A key result of the standard analysis of demand is that the
value of copyright exceptions and extra consumer territorial
access rights will be embedded into a demand curve. Hence,
there is an argument that agents and creators automatically
extract value from copyright exceptions and cross border
rights. Similarly, ifthe extent of exceptions or cross border
rights is changed then the demand curve will automatically
shift to reflect these. Prices go up if copyright exceptions
are increased (as consumers are assumed to gain, hence their
valuations increase), and down ifexceptions are reduced.2

SeeRogers, M; Corrigan, R and Tomalin, J (2010). The economic
impact of consumer copyright

exceptions: a literature review. Consumer Focus, London, UK. For
a more in depth analysis of copyright exceptions impact weighing
consumer value and economic damage to copyright holders.

Is there a need for more clarity as regards the scope of what
needs to be authorised (or not) in digital transmissions?

1. The act of “making available”

Is the scope of the “making available” right incross-border
situations – i.e. when content is disseminated across borders –
sufficiently clear?

Yes and no but mostly no. Copyright laws are ridiculously
complicated and inaccessible to ordinary mortals. The right may
be clear to copyright experts but not to ordinary people.

[In particular if you are a right holder:]Could a clarification
of the territorial scope of the “making available” right have
an effect on the recognition of your rights (e.g. whether you
are considered to be an author or not, whether you are
considered to have transferred your rights or not), on your
remuneration, or on the enforcement of rights (including the
availability of injunctive relief3

Injunctive relief is a temporary or permanent remedy allowing
the right holder to stopor prevent an infringement of his/her
right.

)?

I don't know. I don't have the empirical evidence to answer such
a question.

2. Two rights involved in a single act of exploitation
------------------------------------------------------

[In particular if you a service provider or a right holder:]Does
the application of two rights to a single act of economic
exploitation in the online environment (e.g. a download) create
problems for you?

 NO

I don't think this should a major issue though some large
copyright holders have been working on ways to extract
extraeconomic rent from the issue since the internet hit public
consciousness in the mid 1990s (and probably before).4

SeeRogers, M; Corrigan, R and Tomalin, J (2010). The economic
impact of consumer copyright

exceptions: a literature review. Consumer Focus,London, UK.

There is indeed the complication associated with the two rights
being held by different agents – a hint of the unnecessary
complexity of copyright law. However, the default assumption
that any potential newrevenues flowing from technological or
other innovations should automatically flow to the copyright
holder is flawed.

Suppose someone buys a sofa and subsequently a large flat screen
TV that enhances the experience of sitting on the sofa. The
furniture seller is not entitled to extra revenuebecause their
customer, as a result of a separate purchase is now deriving
extra benefit from their sofa.

The unstated assumption that there is necessarily economic harm
to copyright holders when new technology enables new revenue
flows is false.

3.
--

Linking and browsing

Should the provision of a hyperlink leading to a work or other
subject matter protected under copyright, either in general or
under specific circumstances, be subject to the authorisation
of the rightholder?

 NO – Categorically not.Rights holders should have no right
to veto links.Such a restriction on linking would break the
internet for ordinary users, for businesses, governments, NGOs,
educational establishments; and would be largely unworkable in
practice.

As the consultation notes,a number hyperlinks cases have been
referred to the CJEU. As a hyperlink is just a pointer to where
content can be found, like a reference in an index, “the
provision on a website of clickable links to works freely
available on another website does not constitute an ‘act of
communication to the public’”, as noted in the recent Svensson
case (C-466 / 12).

Rights holders would continue to have access to redress through
the courts in relation to the large scale systematic provision
of links designed to leadto infringing content. There were a
number of UK cases in this area in 2013.

Should the viewing of a web-page where this implies the
temporary reproduction of a work or other subject matter
protected under copyright on the screen and in the cache
memoryof the user’s computer, either in general or under
specific circumstances, be subject to the authorisation of the
rightholder?

 NO – Categorically not. This temporary reproduction is a
function of the technology of browsing the world wide web.The
applicability of the temporary copying exception to internet
browsing is being considered by the CJEU but it would seem
sensible given the nature of the technology that temporary
reproduction during browsing should fall within the exception.

It is, however, critical to be clear about this. As recently as
the 1990s large entertainment industries attempted, in the US,
to leverage this function of the technology and copyright's
exclusive right to reproduce copies of protected works, to
increase their control of themarket and revenues for
copyrighted works. They argued that any part of a copyright
work being copied even temporarily in a computer's random
access memory was an unauthorised reproduction. The US
copyright law (from the 1970s) allowed no exceptions
forinternet related processes or uses. So industry lobbyists
claimed they should be entitled to charge for all these extra
digital copies and part copies that were a side effect of the
way digital technology worked. And they succeeded in getting
the Digital Millenium Copyright Act passed in 1998, largely
based on this pay-per-view/pay-per-copy/pay-per-use view of the
world. The EU followed on with our very own version of the DMCA
and it's anti circumvention provisions in the copyright and
related rights directive of 2001, 3 years later.

Yet think about this from a different perspective. If every time
an electronic version of a copyrighted work appears in temporary
cache or random access memory of a computer itconstitutes the
making of an chargeable copy, we are providing copyright
holders with substantial control of even the consumption of
their works; not just the copying, reproduction and other
traditional rights associated with copyright.

It would be anathema to the public interest to provide such
additionalrights to copyright holder when there are vastly less
socially damaging options available such as putting their works
behind a pay wall. Such regulations would additionally be
unworkable in practice and bring the law into disrepute.

4. Download to own digital content

[In particular if you are an end user/consumer:]Have you faced
restrictions when trying to resell digital files that you have
purchased (e.g. mp3 file, e-book)?

 YES

It's not just a question of resale but transfer of legally
acquired content between my own devices and/or from old failing
equipment to newer replacements.

[In particular if you are a right holderor a service provider:]
What would be the consequences of providing a legal framework
enabling the resale of previously purchased digital content?
Please specify per market (type of content) concerned.

[Open question]

Economics suggests secondary market sales can be accounted for
when setting initial sales price. It's more complicated with
digital content transfers due to the “forward and delete” point
mentioned by the consultation. I'm sure the Research Council
UK's CREATe initiative and numerous other IPcentres round the
EU would be happy to be commissioned to do some research on
this. The UK's Intellectual Property Office has a team of
economists who could also probably offer some advice.

Registration of works and other subject matter – is it a good
idea?

Would the creation of a registration system at EU level help in
the identification and licensing of works and other subject
matter?

 YES

On balance a voluntary registration system could be beneficial
for the long term identification of copyrightownership history
and facilitation of licensing. See the UK Hargreaves Review
recommendations on a copyright hub. A large reduction in the
term of copyright would ease the potential need for such a
registration system however.

What would be the possible advantages of such a system?

[Open question]

Clarity of copyright control and easier facilitation of
licensing.

What would be the possible disadvantages of such a system?

[Open question]

Costly and potentially cumbersome; plus open to control by the
morepowerful economic actors.

What incentives for registration by rightholders could be
envisaged?

[Open question]

Entirely dependent on the specific systems, processes and
infrastructure used to facilitate registration.

How to improve the use and interoperability of identifiers

What should be the role of the EU in promoting the adoption
of identifiers in the content sector, and in promoting the
development and interoperability of rights ownership and
permissions databases?

[Open question]

I'm not sure the EUhas a role here other than to encourage the
adoption of open standards and interoperability. It's also
likely the EU can influence this more through the purchasing
processes of the EU's institutions – economic influence –
rather than through regulatory approaches.

Term of protection – is it appropriate?

Are the current terms of copyright protection still appropriate
in the digital environment?

 NO

No. The current terms are too long even if we didn't live in a
digital world. Patent terms are generally20 years. How have we
arrived at a situation where copyright terms are the life of
the author plus 50 years (Berne) or 70 years (EU, US and
others) or 100 years (Mexico) or 70 years after first
publication of music (EU)?

In the case of long copyright termsour three sets of
stakeholders -

Creators

Economic agents

Society

mostly lose. The only winners are the few wealthy creators and
economic agents with the small number of copyrighted works with
long commercially successful lives;which would otherwise
fallinto the public domainmany decades earlier.

Only about 4% of copyright works older than 20 years are
commercially available, so 96% remain locked up for the rest of
the creator's life plus 70 years even though no one is selling
them. The public thereforelose out, as do other creators and
economic agents who would like to build on or commercially
exploit those works (and the 4%).

Systemically long copyright terms are a bad deal for most
stakeholders. In recent years, the EU, as the consultation
notes, increased the term of copyright in sound recordings from
50 to 70 years. If we do some basic discounted cash flow
calculations, we discover the real present value factor of the
increase in economic incentive of a term extension of 20 years
is surprisingly small. The present value (therefore specific
differential economic incentive at the time of recording) of
the extra 20 years on top of the original 50 years would be:

1/(1+r)51+ 1/(1+r)52+ … + 1/(1+r)70

- Whereris the equivalent of a standard rate of inflation
(expressed as a decimal) for the 20 years. In fact with the
help of some neat mathematical manipulation we can derive a
formula for the present value of a constant income (C) for a
particular copyright term:

Present value =C(1-e-rt)/r

Where eisEuler’s number, a universal mathematical constant (and
the base number for natural logarithms)

ris the percentage annual discount rate expressed as a decimal,

andtis the copyright term in years.

So for a termtof 50 years and a discount rate of 10%, the
present value of an income streamCof £1000 per annum would be
£9933, approximately. That sounds like a decent income. Now
compare it with the present value of an equivalent yearly
income if the copyright term were 70 years (just change thetin
thecalculation from 50 to 70), which turns out to be £9991.

The extra present value of the 20 year term extension was just
£58 or 0.6%.

In fact if the copyright term were to last forever, the present
value of the same annual income stream would be
£10,000.(Present value of an infinite income flow at a
constant discount rate =C/r,whereCis the annual income andrthe
discount rate)

A 70 year term of copyright is worth 99.9%, in present value
terms, of the value of a copyright that lasted forever. In
economic terms current terms of copyright are effectively
infinite.

A copyright term that lasts the life of the creator plus 70
years makes no economic sense whatsoever, whether we live in a
digital age or not.

We can repeat these calculations for different discount rates
and income streams and demonstrate that the differential in
real present value terms or the economic incentive provided
bylong copyright terms provides no effective incentive to
creators.5

If we use a rate of 5% for example, an infinite term of
copyright is worth £20,000, 95 years is worth £19,827 and 50
years £18,358. So the 95 year term is worth 99.1% of an
infinite term using a 5% discount rate to allow for the time
value of money. A 50 year term would be worth 91.8% of an
infinite term or 92% of a 95 year term. See also Posner,
Richard A. and William M. Landes. 2003.The Economic Structure
of Intellectual Property Law. Harvard University Press.
Cambridge. Pp210 – 253.

As Thomas Babbington Macaulay said in 1841 in the House of
Commons debate on copyright:

I will take an example. Dr Johnson died fifty-six years ago. If
the law were what my honourable and learned friend wishes to
make it, somebody would now have the monopoly of Dr
Johnson'sworks. Who that somebody would be it is impossible to
say; but we may venture to guess. I guess, then, that it would
have been some bookseller, who was the assign of another
bookseller, who was the grandson ofa third bookseller, who had
bought the copyright from Black Frank, the doctor's servant and
residuary legatee, in 1785 or 1786. Now, would the knowledge
that this copyright would exist in 1841 have been a source of
gratification to Johnson? Would it have stimulated his
exertions? Would it have once drawn him out of his bed before
noon? Would it have once cheered him under a fit of the spleen?
Would it have induced him to give us one more allegory, one more
life of a poet, one more imitation of Juvenal? I firmly believe
not. I firmly believe that a hundred years ago, when he was
writing our debates for the Gentleman's Magazine, he would very
much rather have had twopenceto buy a plate of shin of beef at a
cook's shop underground. Considered as a reward to him, the
difference between a twenty years' and sixty years' term of
posthumous copyright wouldhave been nothing or next to nothing.
But is the difference nothing to us? I can buy Rasselasfor
sixpence; I might have had to give five shillings for it. I
canbuy the Dictionary, the entire genuine Dictionary, for two
guineas, perhaps for less; I might have had to give five or six
guineas for it. Do I grudge this to a man like Dr Johnson? Not
at all. Show me that the prospect of this boon roused him to
any vigorous effort, or sustained his spirits under depressing
circumstances, and I am quite willing to pay the price of such
an object, heavy as that price is. But what I do complain of is
that my circumstances are to be worse, and Johnson's none the
better; thatI am to give five pounds for what to him was not
worth a farthing.

So clearly we need to be extremely sceptical of arguments
declaring that the only way intellectual property owners
(creators and/or agents) are going to derive an appropriate
income fromtheir creative assets is by retaining or extending
already excessively long copyright terms.

Copyright terms are already demonstrably excessive and I say
that as a published author, as much as an academic, reader or
plain member of the public. I would further suggest the need
for detailed empirical research to provide a sound evidence to
inform policy makers (worldwide, not just in the EU) in setting
a more appropriate copyright term. This may lead as now to terms
being tailored to the particular type of copyrighted work but in
all cases the simple economics suggest these terms would be
significantly shorter.

III.Limitations and exceptions in the Single Market

Are there problems arising from the fact that most limitations
and exceptions provided in the EUcopyright directives are
optional for the Member States?

 YES

Hugenholtz, P. B. and Senftleben, Martin, Fair Use in Europe: In
Search of Flexibilities (November 14,
2011).http://ssrn.com/abstract=1959554explain this better than
I can:

There appear to be good reasons and ample opportunity to
(re)introduce a measure of flexibility in the national
copyright systems of Europe. The need for more openness in
copyright law is almost self-evident in this information
society of highly dynamic and unpredictable change. A historic
perspective also suggests that copyright law, particularly in
the civil law jurisdictions of Europe, has lost much of its
flexibility in the course of the past century. By contrast,
with the accelerating pace of technological change in the 21st
Century, and in view of the complex process of law making in
the EU, the need for flexible copyright norms both at the EU
and the national level is now greater than ever.

Against this background,the authors argue that the EU copyright
acquis leaves considerably more room for flexibilities than its
closed list of permitted limitations and exceptions suggests. In
the first place, the enumerated provisions are in many cases
categorically worded prototypes rather than precisely
circumscribed exceptions, thus leaving the Member States broad
margins of implementation. In the second place, the EU acquis
leaves ample unregulated space with regard to the right of
adaptation that has so far remained largelyunharmonized. A
Member State desiring to take full advantage of all policy
space available under the Information Society Directive, might
achieve this by literally transposing the Directive’s entire
catalogue of exception prototypes into national law.
Incombination with the three-step test, this would effectively
lead to a semi-open norm almost as flexible as the fair use
rule of the United States. Less ambitious Member States seeking
to enhance flexibility while keeping its existing structure of
limitations and exceptions largely intact, can explore
thepolicy space left by distinct exception prototypes. In
addition, the unharmonized status of the adaptation right would
leave Member States free to provide for limitations and
exceptions permitting, for example, fair transformative uses in
the context of producing and disseminating user-generated
content.

Should some/all of the exceptions be made mandatory and, if so,
is there a need for a higher level of harmonisation of such
exceptions?

 YES

23.Should any new limitations and exceptions be added to or
removed from the existing catalogue?Please explain by referring
to specific cases.

[Open question]

From my work with Mark Rogers and Joshua Tomalin in 2010
(Rogers, Mark; Corrigan, Ray and Tomalin, Joshua (2010). The
economic impact of consumer copyright

exceptions: a literature review. Consumer Focus, London, UK.)
http://oro.open.ac.uk/25604/5/The_economics_of_consumer_copyright_exceptions_final.pdf:

Investigating potential economic damage to rights-holders
requires an

analysis of how consumer copyright exception could affect the
demand for the

original creative work. The processes via which consumer
copyright

exceptions influence the demand curve for original creative work
can be

complicated. Thissaid, a standard analysis of the demand for
creative works

must assume that consumers incorporate the benefit of copyright
exceptions

into their demand. A consumer’s decision to purchase is based on
the benefits

of the product, including – in the case of creative work – the
value of any

copyright exception. In this sense, it can be argued that a
creator

automatically extracts value from copyright exceptions, since
these directly

influence the demand for the original creative work.

In our review, the twomost commonly cited ‘economic’ studies
into the effects

of Private Copying Remuneration (PCR) systems – Econlaw (2007)
and

Nathan Associates (2006) – do not provide any useful evidence
that

consumer copyright exceptions cause economic damage to
rights-holders, or

that a copyright levy is justified on these grounds.

•The Econlaw study incorrectly equates economic damage with

consumer value and does not contain a formal discussion of the

demand for copyrighted works.

•The Nathan Associates study does not make a necessary

distinction between ‘damage to consumers and producers’ and

‘damage to society as a whole’. It likely overstates the
economic

damage caused by PCR. It also uses estimates for demand

elasticities that do not come from formal economic analysis.

The economic evidence that format-shifting, parody and
user-generated

content cause any kind of economic damage to rights-holders
simply does not

exist. Arguments that support tighter copyright law, or support
PCR systems,

tend to confuse economic damagewith consumer value. Any future
analysis

on this issue needs to investigate the conditions under which
the proposed

consumer copyright exceptions would have any impact on demand
for

creative work.

The complications associated with the application oflimitations
and exceptions could be greatly eased by the universal and
drastic reduction in copyright terms. In this innovative age,
the need for creators and inventors to have to consult a lawyer
to get a definitive opinion on whether their work is permitted
by existing rights holders or limitations and exceptions built
into a very complex law, is somewhat anomalous.

That said I wonder whether there should be a wider recognition
perhaps formal sanctioning of non commercial sharing of copies
of copyrightedworks. By non commercial I'm referring to that
proportion the widespread sharing that currently occurs that
would not happen if those participating were obliged to
pay-per-copy. So e.g. teens or those on low incomes who might
not have access to the economic means to pay for such material;
or sharers getting access to works no longer commercially
available; or those sharing materials released under open or
creative commons licences. So in terms of the three generic
stakeholders it would be economically neutral for creators and
agents but nevertheless have a positive effect on the welfare
of society.

24. Independently from the questions above, is there a need to
provide for a greater degree of flexibility in the EU
regulatory framework for limitations andexceptions?

That's a complicated question that requires robust empirical
study and again the question would be greatly eased by a
significant reduction in copyright terms.

25. If yes, what would be the best approach to provide for
flexibility? (e.g. interpretation by national courts and the
ECJ, periodic revisions of the directives, interpretations by
the Commission, built-in flexibility, e.g. in the form of a
fair-use or fair dealing provision / open norm, etc.)? Please
explain indicating what would be therelative advantages and
disadvantages of such an approach as well as its possible
effects on the functioning of the Internal Market.

[Open question]

There's no “best approach” but there could be a better informed
approach if the EU, member state governments and industry were
to commit to funding a great deal more empirical research.

26. Does the territoriality of limitations and exceptions, in
your experience, constitute a problem?

 YES

27. In the event that limitations and exceptions established
atnational level were to have cross-border effect, how should
the question of “fair compensation” be addressed, when such
compensation is part of the exception? (e.g. who pays whom,
where?)

[Open question]

This is another question requiring empirical research.

A.
==

Access to content in libraries and archives

1. Preservation and archiving

28. (a)[In particular if you are an institutional user:]Have you
experienced specific problems when trying to use an exception to
preserve and archive specific works or other subject matter in
your collection?

(b)[In particular if you are a right holder:]Have you
experienced problems with the use by libraries, educational
establishments, museum or archives of the preservation
exception?

 YES

29. If there are problems,how would they best be solved?

[Open question]

Libraries and archives have long been under threat in from UK
government funding cuts and in the face of the more powerful
economic agents' constant drive to increase their industries'
control of copyrighted content.Carefully-defined preservation
exceptions have clear benefits, enabling libraries to maintain
and facilitate access to our cultural heritage for the
enjoyment of present and future generations. The cultural and
societal welfare associated with thiswork is incalculable.

30. If your view is that a legislative solution is needed, what
would be its main elements? Which activities of the beneficiary
institutions should be covered and under which conditions?

[Open question]

Library experts are better placed to answer this question but it
is another area where sound empirical research is required.
Libraries, museums and archives serve the public good and
require exceptional protections legislative, political and
economic.

31. If your view is that a different solution is needed, what
would it be?

[Open question]

Libraries and archives are exceptionally important and require
special protections even more so in our digital age.

InThe Public Domain: Enclosing the Commons of the Mind, James
Boyle eloquentlyand passionately argues that our culture,
science and democracy depend on a delicate balance between
ideas that are controlled by intellectual property and those
that are freely available in the public domain. He tells a
terrific series of engaging storiesabout, for example, why the
building blocks of synthetic biology, business methods, pairs
of musical notes are now owned, why blues, jazz or soul music
would probably be illegal if it were invented today, why most
of 20th century culture is legally unavailable to us, and why
the World Wide Web would, most likely, have been killed at
birth if lawyers, commerce and policy-makers could have reacted
quickly enough.

This all adds up to what Boyle calls a 'second enclosure
movement' – except that on this occasion we’re not facing an
enclosure of the grassy commons of olde Englande but rather an
enclosure of the 'commons of the mind' and a serious erosion of
the public domain, a state of affairs future generations will
rightly condemn us for allowing to happen; at the very point
that we have the technical and economic capacity to facilitate
universal access to recorded human knowledge, a digital library
of Alexandria.

The book, destined to become the standard text in the area, also
serves as theSilent Springofthe information society – a clarion
call to understand and protect the public domain through
scholarship, communication, articulation and recognition of
shared interests and values that allow that notion -the public
domain- to come into public consciousness and a diverseecology
of activism to support all this. A kind of "environmentalism
for information" and the public domain.

Libraries, museums and archives are at the coalface of this
environmentalism for information and the public domain and
require,in addition to legal protections, public substantive or
at the very least sufficient public funding to enable them to
engage effectively in such work.

2.
--

Off-premises access to library collections

32. (a)[In particular if you are an institutional user:]Have you
experienced specific problems when trying to negotiate
agreements with rights holders that enable you to provide
remote access, including across borders, to your collections
(or parts thereof) for purposes of research and private study?

(b)[Inparticular if you are an end user/consumer:]Have you
experienced specific problems when trying to consult, including
across borders, works and other subject-matter held in the
collections of institutions such as universities and national
libraries when you are not on the premises of the institutions
in question?

(c)[In particular if you are aright holder:]Have you negotiated
agreements with institutional users that enable those
institutions to provide remote access, including across
borders, to the works or other subject-matter in their
collections, for purposes of research and private study?

[Open question]

I have often experienced problems when trying to consult works
when not on the premises or in the territory of the institution
in question.

33. If there are problems, how would they best be solved?

[Open question]

Through an open universally deployed high speed neutral
technical infrastructure and a permissive intellectual property
regime for libraries and archives.

34. If your view is that alegislative solution is needed, what
would be its main elements? Which activities of the beneficiary
institutions should be covered and under which conditions?

[Open question]

Special copyright exceptions for non-commercial use of library
and archive materials.

35. If your view is that a different solution is needed, what
would it be?

[Open question]

Deployment of investment to enable construction of technical
infrastructure to facilitate digital archiving and connecting
all libraries and archives to the backbone of a neutral
internet.

3.
--

E – lending

36. (a)[In particular if you are alibrary:]Have you experienced
specific problems when trying to negotiate agreements to enable
the electronic lending (e-lending), including across borders, of
books or other materials held in your collection?

(b)[In particular if you are an end user/consumer:]Have you
experienced specific problems when trying to borrow books or
other materials electronically (e-lending), including across
borders, from institutions such as public libraries?

(c)[In particular if you are aright holder:]Have you negotiated
agreements with libraries to enable them to lend books or other
materials electronically, including across borders?

 YES

37. If there are problems, how would they best be solved?

[Open question]

In the first instance revoke the legal instruments which make
the circumvention of and communication of the weaknesses in
digital rights management (DRM) technologies unlawful.

DRM largely doesn't fulfil it's industry-stated intended purpose
of protecting rights-holders rights but does undermine the
security of the whole population of end users. Cory Doctorow
explained this nicely in a recent article in the Guardian6What
happens with digital rights management in the real world?
==============================================================

http://www.theguardian.com/technology/blog/2014/feb/05/digital-rights-management

:

“DRM is designed on the presumption that users don't want it,
and if theycould turn it off, they would. You only need DRM to
stop users from doing things they're trying to do and want to
do. If the thing the DRM restricts is something no one wants to
do anyway, you don't need the DRM. You don't need a lock on a
door that no oneever wants to open.

DRM assumes that the computer's owner is its adversary. For DRM
to work, there has to be no obvious way to remove, interrupt or
fool it. For DRM to work, it has to reside in a computer whose
operating system is designed to obfuscate some of its files and
processes: to deliberately hoodwink the computer's owner about
what the computer is doing. If you ask your computer to list
all the running programs, it has to hide the DRM program from
you. If you ask it to show you the files, it has to hide the
DRM files from you. Anything less and you, as the computer's
owner, would kill the program and delete its associated files
at the first sign of trouble.

An increase in the security of the companies you buy your media
from means a decrease in your own security. When your computer
is designed to treat you as an untrusted party, you are at
serious risk: anyone who can put malicious software on your
computer has only to take advantage of your computer's
intentional capacity to disguise its operationfrom you in order
to make it much harder for you to know when and how you've been
compromised.”

It is also important in relation to e-lending to encourage the
development of neutral open standards and interoperability.

38.[In particular if you are an institutional user:]What
differences do you see in the management of physical and online
collections, including providing access to your subscribers?
What problems have you encountered?

[Open question]

I have no answer to this question.

39.[In particular ifyou are a right holder:]What difference do
you see between libraries’ traditional activities such as
on-premises consultation or public lending and activities such
as off-premises (online, at a distance) consultation and
e-lending? What problems have you encountered?

[Open question]

I have no answer to this question.

4.
--

Mass digitisation

40.[In particular if you are an institutional user,engaging or
wanting to engage in mass digitisation projects, a right
holder, a collective management organisation:]Would it be
necessary in your country to enact legislation to ensure that
the results of the 2011 MoU (i.e. the agreements concluded
between libraries and collecting societies) have a cross-border
effect so that out of commerce works can be accessed across the
EU?

 YES

I believe so. I understand the UK Intellectual Property Office
iscurrently also working on updating the UK's library and
archive preservation exceptions to permit preservation copying
of all types of media.

41. Would it be necessary to develop mechanisms, beyond those
already agreed for other types of content (e.g. for audio- or
audio-visual collections, broadcasters’ archives)?

 YES

Most likely.

B.
==

Teaching

42. (a)[In particular if you are an end user/consumer or an
institutionaluser:]Have you experienced specific problems when
trying to use works or other subject-matter for illustration
for teaching, including across borders?

(b)[In particular if you are a right holder:]Have you
experienced specific problems resulting from the way in which
works or other subject-matter are used for illustration for
teaching, including across borders?

 YES

43. If there are problems, how would they best be solved?

[Open question]

Reducing the exorbitant cost of textbooks and licences to access
copyrighted materials.

44. What mechanisms exist in the market place to facilitate the
use of content for illustration for teaching purposes? How
successful are they?

[Open question]

There are a variety of market mechanisms but they are failing
asevident from the exorbitant cost of textbooks and licences to
access copyrighted materials.

45. If your view is that a legislative solution is needed, what
would be its main elements? Which activities of the beneficiary
institutions should be covered and under what conditions?

[Open question]

Universal legislation to incentivise free and 'green' open
access (green open access, under which authors self-archive
their published papers in open-access repositories) publishing
of all publicly funded research andteaching.

46. If your view is that a different solution is needed, what
would it be?

[Open question]

Legislation plus investment in infrastructure of 'green' open
access publishing. Careful thought will need to be given to the
kinds of sustainable funding/business models needed to support
this. But it is possible to imagine a cross-border licencing
regime whereby member state governments or private/public
partnerships funding open access repositories could charge a
license for access to users in other jurisdictions. The
evolution of sustainable commerce and government funding models
to facilitate access for teaching will be a non trivial
exercise.

C.
==

Research

47. (a)[In particular if you are an end user/consumeror an
institutional user:]Have you experienced specific problems when
trying to use works or other subject matter in the context of
research projects/activities, including across borders?

(b)[In particular if you are a right holder:]Have you
experienced specific problems resulting from the way in which
works or other subject-matter are used in the context of
research projects/activities, including across borders?

 YES

48. If there are problems, how would they best be solved?

[Open question]

The issues are similar as for teaching access.

49. What mechanisms exist in the Member States to facilitate the
use of content for research purposes? How successful are they?

[Open question]

I'm not going to offer an answer to this question.

D.
==

Disabilities

50. (a)[In particular if you are a person with a disability or
an organisation representing persons with disabilities:]Have
you experienced problems with accessibility to content,
including across borders, arising from Member States’
implementation ofthis exception?

(b)[In particular if you are an organisation providing services
for persons with disabilities:]Have you experienced problems
when distributing/communicating works published in special
formats across the EU?

(c)[In particular if you area right holder:]Have you experienced
specific problems resulting from the application of limitations
or exceptions allowing for the distribution/communication of
works published in special formats, including across borders?

 YES

51. If there areproblems, what could be done to improve
accessibility?

[Open question]

WIPO's agreement on the Marrakesh Treaty last year to facilitate
access to published works by visually impaired persons and
persons with print disabilities was a minor miracle few whohad
been fighting for it for so long ever believed would come to
pass.

It remains to be seen what impact it will have in practice on
visually impaired persons' and persons with print disabilities'
actual access to published works. The treaty is supposed
toaddress the “book famine” suffered by blind, visually
disabled and those with print disabilities by requiring its
contracting parties to adopt national law provisions that
permit the reproduction, distribution and making available of
published works in accessible formats through limitations and
exceptions to the rights of copyright rights-holders.

52. What mechanisms exist in the market place to facilitate
accessibility to content? How successful are they?

[Open question]

The marker place has beenfailing dismally given the now
widespread agreement on the existence of the book famine.

E.
==

Text and data mining

53. (a)[In particular if you are an end user/consumer or an
institutional user:]Have you experienced obstacles, linked to
copyright, when trying to use text or data mining methods,
including across borders?

(b)[In particular if you are a service provider:]Have you
experienced obstacles, linked to copyright, when providing
services based on text or data mining methods, including across
borders?

(c)[In particular if you are a right holder:]Have you
experienced specific problems resulting from the use of text
and data mining in relation to copyright protected content,
including across borders?

 YES

Text and data mining is not my area of academic expertise.

54. If there are problems, how would they best be solved?

[Open question]

Text and data mining for scientific and technological
development purposes offer significant potential benefits. Yet
it often requires the negotiation of complexcontracts or
licences between researchers and rights-holders. Some of the
transaction costs involved could be eased through the
development of more standardised and open and in some instances
compulsory licensing models.

55. If your view is that a legislative solution is needed, what
would be its main elements? Which activities should be covered
and under what conditions?

[Open question]

I don't have access to sufficient empirical evidence to suggest
a legislative solution but again it comes back to the complex
calculus of the relative interests of the three generic sets of
stakeholders; in this instance

researchers & creators/originators

economic agents &rights-holders

society

I understand the UK intends to introduce a specific copyright
exception to encourage the use of text and data mining
techniques in research, within the scope of Article 5(3)(a) of
the Infosoc Directive. There may be a case to expandthe scope
of such an exception to teaching, private and non-commercial
uses.

56. If your view is that a different solution is needed, what
would it be?

[Open question]

There is something to be said for the Google book project
approach here, exceptperhaps in this instance it should be a
publicly funded version. Prominent academic institutions would
make their collections available for scanning into
interoperable text & data mining friendly standard open
formats.

As per teaching and research contexts, work is required on
working out sustainable funding and business models to support
this kind of infrastructure on an ongoing basis.

57. Are there other issues, unrelated to copyright, that
constitute barriers to the use of text or data mining methods?

[Open question]

Text and data mining experts are better placed to provide an
informed response on this question.

F.
==

User-generated content

58. (a)[In particular if you are an end user/consumer:]Have you
experienced problems when trying to use pre-existing works or
other subject matter to disseminate new content on the
Internet, including across borders?

(b)[In particular if you are a service provider:]Have you
experienced problems when users publish/disseminate new content
based on the pre-existing works or other subject-matter through
your service, including across borders?

(c)[In particular if you are a right holder:]Have you
experienced problems resulting from the way the users are using
pre-existing works or other subject-matter to disseminate new
content on the Internet, including across borders?

 YES

59. (a)[In particular if you are an end user/consumer or a right
holder:]Have you experienced problems when trying to ensure that
the work you have created (on the basis of pre-existing works)is
properly identified for online use? Are proprietary systems
sufficient in this context?

(b)[In particular if you are a service provider:]Do you provide
possibilities for users that are publishing/disseminating the
works they have created (on the basisof pre-existing works)
through your service to properly identify these works for
online use?

I'm not sure I fully understand what question 58 is getting at.

60. (a)[In particular if you are an end user/consumer or a right
holder):]Have you experiencedproblems when trying to be
remunerated for the use of the work you have created (on the
basis of pre-existing works)?

 YES

61. If there are problems, how would they best be solved?

[Open question]

I don't have an answer to this question

62. If your view is that a legislative solution is needed, what
would be its main elements? Which activities should be covered
and under what conditions?

[Open question]

I don't have an answer to this question.

63. If your view is that a different solution is needed,what
would it be?

[Open question]

I don't have an answer to this question.

IV.Private copying and reprography

64. In your view, is there a need to clarify at the EU level the
scope and application of the private copying and reprography
exceptions7

Art.5.2(a) and 5.2(b) of Directive 2001/29/EC.

in the digital environment?

 YES

65. Should digital copies made by end users for private purposes
in the context of a service that has been licensed by
rightholders, and where the harm to the rightholder is minimal,
be subject to private copying levies?8

This issue was also addressed in the recommendations of Mr
Antonio Vitorino resulting from the mediation on private
copying and reprography levies

 NO

The two most commonly cited economic studies into theeffectsof
private copying remuneration (PCR) systems – Econlaw (2007)9

EconLaw (2007). Economic Analysis of Private Copy Remuneration,
Report to

Groupement Européen des Sociétés d’Auteurs et Compositeurs
(GESAC).

and Nathan Associates (2006)10

Nathan Associates Study (2006) ‘Private Copying Levies on
Digital Equipment

and Media: Direct Effects on Consumers and Producers and
Indirect Effects

on Sales of Online Music and Ringtones’.

– do not provide any useful evidence that consumer copyright
exceptions cause economic damage to rights-holders, or that a
copyright levy is justified on these grounds.

•The Econlaw study incorrectly equates economic damage with
consumer value and does not contain a formal discussion of the
demand for copyrighted works.

•The Nathan Associates study does not make a necessary
distinction between ‘damage to consumers and producers’ and
‘damage to society as a whole’. It likely overstates the
economic damage caused by PCR. It also uses estimates for
demand elasticities that do not come from formal economic
analysis.

The empirical economic evidence that format-shifting, private
and user-generated content cause any kind of economic damage to
rights-holders does not appear to exist. Arguments that support
tighter copyright law, or support PCR systems, tend to confuse
economic damage with consumer value.

66. How would changes in levies with respect to the application
to online services (e.g. services based on cloud computing
allowing, for instance, users to have copies on different
devices) impact the development and functioning of new business
models on the one hand and rightholders’ revenue on the other?

[Open question]

Any future analysis on this issue needs to investigate the
conditions under which the proposed consumer
copyrightexceptions would have any impact on demand for

creative work.

67. Would you see an added value in making levies visible on the
invoices for products subject to levies?11

This issue was also addressed in the recommendations of Mr
Antonio Vitorinoresulting from the mediation on private copying
and reprography levies.

 YES

As stated above there is no economic case to be made for levies.
However, if there is an insistence on having them for other
reasons e.g. in the interests of certain economic agents, then
transparency on the proportion of the product price due to the
levies would be appropriate.

68. Have you experienced a situation where a cross-border
transaction resulted in undue levy payments, or duplicate
payments of the same levy, or otherobstacles to the free
movement of goods or services?

I don't have an answer to that question.

69. What percentage of products subject to a levy is sold to
persons other than natural persons for purposes clearly
unrelated to private copying? Do any ofthose transactions
result in undue payments? Please explain in detail the example
you provide (type of products, type of transaction,
stakeholders, etc.).

[Open question]

I don't have an answer to that question.

70. Where such undue payments arise, whatpercentage of trade do
they affect? To what extent could a priori exemptions and/or ex
post reimbursement schemes existing in some Member States help
to remedy the situation?

[Open question]

I don't have the empirical evidence to answer that question.

71. If you have identified specific problems with the current
functioning of the levy system, how would these problems best
be solved?

[Open question]

Scrap levies since there is no economic case to be made for
them.

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

V.Fair remuneration of authors and performers

72.[In particular if you are an author/performer:] What is the
best mechanism (or combination of mechanisms) to ensure that
you receive an adequate remuneration for the exploitation of
your works and performances?

[Open question]

There is no one best mechanism. There are a variety of revenue
flow models which can work either through direct sales or
through intermediaries e.g. economic agents such as publishers
and collecting societies dealing on fair andreasonable terms
with authors/performers. Easy, widespread (and sometimes open
and/or creative commons) access to authors/performers' work at
a reasonable cost is the key.

73. Is there a need to act at the EU level (for instance to
prohibit certain clauses in contracts)?

 YES

I'd recommend reading Diane Rappaport,The Recording Artist as an
Indentured Servant-

http://homesweetjeromedrapaport.wordpress.com/2013/08/13/the-recording-artist-as-an-indentured-servant/

Steve Albini,The Problem with Music-

http://www.negativland.com/news/?page_id=17

and Courtney Love,CourtneyLove Does the Math-

http://www.salon.com/2000/06/14/love_7/

on the exploitative nature of music industry contracting with
performing artists. The performers need stronger legal
protections.

74. Ifyou consider that the current rules are not effective,
what would you suggest to address the shortcomings you
identify?

[Open question]

The application of a generic unfair contract terms principle to
recording industries' contracts with performers would be a
start. The prosecution of entertainment industries for fraud in
cases of the manipulation of accounts to avoid paying fair
recompense to performers and creators would be another
approach. Currently performers and creators lose out in these
cases orare obliged to pursue expensive civil legal proceedings
e.g. for copyright infringement, declaratory relief, breach of
contract etc. to fight for a fair share of the revenues arising
from the sales of their creative works and derivatives.

There is quite alot of scope for EU action to address iniquities
in relation to the remuneration of performers and authors.

But I would agree with the UK IPO, thatconsideration of this
issue should be based on a clear understanding of the nature of
the problem and its scale and the extent to which the problem is
unique to copyright contracts. In other words there is further
need for robust empirical research on the scale and scope of
the issue.

VI.Respect for rights

75. Should the civil enforcement system in the EU berendered
more efficient for infringements of copyright committed with a
commercial purpose?

It entirely depends on what is meant by rendering the system
“more efficient.” Too often this kind of argument is used as
an excuse to trample on fundamental rights. So it may be
appropriate to remind those involved in collating this
consultation of the opinion of the Court of Justice of the
European Union on this pointin Case C-275/06

Productores de Música de España (Promusicae) v Telefónica de
España SAU (2008).

Thedispute was between Spanish music rights holders' association
Promusicae and Spain's top telecommunications operator,
Telefonica.

Telefonica argued that, under a national law based on EU rules,
it had to disclose the name of an Internet subscriber only for
criminal actions, not civil ones.

"Community law does not require the member states, in order to
ensurethe effective protection of copyright, to lay down an
obligation to disclose personal data in the context of civil
proceedings," the court said in a statement."

The courtsaid:

"There are several community directives whose purpose is that
the memberstates should ensure, especially in the information
society, effective protection of industrial property, in
particular copyright.

Such protection cannot, however, affect the requirements of the
protection of personal data. The directives on the protection
of personal data also allow the member states to provide for
exceptions to the obligation to guarantee the confidentiality
of traffic data"

In other words, the ECJ concluded that privacy trumps copyright
protection and the judgement was expected since the ECJ's
Advocate General, Juliane Kokott, inadvising the court in
August of last year, basically said the same thing.

In other words, the ECJ concluded that privacy trumpscopyright
protection and the judgement was expected since the ECJ's
Advocate General, Juliane Kokott, inadvising the court inAugust
of last year, basically said the same thing. TheCourt press
release relating to the judgement stated:

29 January 2008

Judgment of the Court of Justice in Case C-275/06

Productores de Música de España (Promusicae) v Telefónica de
España SAU

THE COURT RULES ON THE PROTECTION OF INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY
RIGHTS IN THE INFORMATION SOCIETY

Community law does not require the Member States, in order to
ensure the effective protection of copyright, to lay down an
obligationto disclose personal data in the context of civil
proceedings

There are several Community directives 1 whose purpose is that
the Member States should ensure, especially in the information
society, effective protection of industrial property, in
particularcopyright. Such protection cannot, however, affect
the requirements of the protection of personal data. The
directives on the protection of personal data 2 also allow the
Member States to provide for exceptions to the obligation to
guarantee the confidentiality of traffic data.

Promusicae is a Spanish non-profit-making organisation of
producers and publishers of musical and audiovisual recordings.
It applied to the Spanish courts for an order that Telefónica
should disclose the identities and physical addresses of
certain persons whom it provided with internet access services,
whose IP address and date and time of connection were known.
According to Promusicae, those persons were using the KaZaA
file exchange program (peer-to-peer or P2P) and providing
access in shared files of personal computers to phonograms in
which members of Promusicae held the exploitation rights. It
therefore sought disclosure of the above information in order
to be able to bring civil proceedings against the persons
concerned.

Telefónica argued that, under Spanish law,3 the communication of
the data sought by Promusicae was authorised only in a criminal
investigation or for the purpose of safeguarding public
security and national defence.

The Spanish court asks the Court of Justice ofthe European
Communities whether Community law requires the Member States to
lay down, in order to ensure effective protection of copyright,
an obligation to communicate personal data in the context of
civil proceedings.

The Court of Justice notes that theexceptions permitted by the
directives on the protection of personal data include the
measures necessary for the protection of the rights and
freedoms of others. As the directive on privacy and electronic
communications does not specify the rights and freedoms
concerned by that exception, it must be interpreted as
expressing the Community legislature’s intention not to exclude
from its scope the protection of the right to property or
situations in which authors seek to obtain that protection in
civil proceedings. It does not therefore preclude the
possibility for the Member States of laying down an obligation
to disclose personal data in the context of civil proceedings.
However, it does not compel the Member States to lay down such
an obligation.

As to thedirectives on intellectual property, the Court of
Justice finds that they too do not require the Member States to
lay down, in order to ensure effective protection of copyright,
an obligation to communicate personal data in the context of
civil proceedings.

That being so, the Court points out that the present reference
for a preliminary ruling raises the question of the need to
reconcile the requirements of the protection of different
fundamental rights, namely the right to respect for private
life on theone hand and the rights to protection of property
and to an effective remedy on the other.

The Court concludes that the Member States must, when
transposing the directives on intellectual property and the
protection of personal data, rely on an interpretation of those
directives which allows a fair balance to be struck between the
various fundamental rights protected by the Community legal
order. Further, when implementing the measures transposing
those directives, the authorities and courts of the Member
States must not only interpret their national law in a manner
consistent with the directives but also make sure that they do
not rely on an interpretation of them which would be in
conflict with those fundamental rights or with the other
general principlesof Community law, such as the principle of
proportionality.

The full judgment isavailableatthe ECJ website. It is a
technical judgment looking at the details of a collection of EU
directives and how they interact; and how to achieve a balance
between the right to protect personal data and the rightto
protect property but the key parts of the decision in my
opinion are paragraphs 61 to 70:

"Fundamental rights

61 The national court refers in its order for reference to
Articles 17 and 47 of the Charter, the first of which concerns
the protection of the right to property, including intellectual
property, and the second of which concerns the right to an
effective remedy. By so doing, that court must be regarded as
seeking to know whether an interpretation of those directives
to the effect that the Member States are not obliged to lay
down, in order to ensure the effective protection of copyright,
an obligation to communicate personal data in the context of
civil proceedings leads to an infringement of the fundamental
right to property and the fundamentalright to effective
judicial protection.

62 It should be recalled that the fundamental right to property,
which includes intellectual property rights such as copyright
(see, to that effect, Case C‑479/04Laserdisken[2006] ECR
I‑8089, paragraph 65), and the fundamental right to effective
judicial protection constitute general principles of Community
law (see respectively, to that effect, Joined Cases C‑154/04
and C‑155/04Alliance for Natural Health and Others[2005] ECR
I‑6451, paragraph 126 and the case-law cited, and Case
C‑432/05Unibet[2007] ECR I‑2271, paragraph 37 and the
case-law cited).

63 However, the situation in respect of which the national court
puts that question involves, in addition to those two rights, a
further fundamental right, namely the right that guarantees
protection of personal data and hence of private life.

64 According to recital 2 in the preamble to Directive 2002/58,
the directive seeks to respect the fundamental rights and
observes the principles recognised in particular by the
Charter. In particular, the directive seeks to ensure full
respect for the rights set out in Articles 7 and 8 of that
Charter. Article 7 substantially reproduces Article 8 of the
European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and
Fundamental Freedoms signed at Rome on 4 November 1950, which
guarantees the right to respect for private life, and Article 8
of the Charter expressly proclaims the right to protection of
personal data.

65 The present reference for a preliminary ruling thus raises
thequestion of the need to reconcile the requirements of the
protection of different fundamental rights, namely the right to
respect for private life on the one hand and the rights to
protection of property and to an effective remedy on the other.

66 The mechanisms allowing those different rights and interests
to be balanced are contained, first, in Directive 2002/58
itself, in that it provides for rules which determine in what
circumstances and to what extent the processing of personal
data is lawful and whatsafeguards must be provided for, and in
the three directives mentioned by the national court, which
reserve the cases in which the measures adopted to protect the
rights they regulate affect the protection of personal data.
Second, they result from the adoption by the Member States of
national provisions transposing those directives and their
application by the national authorities (see, to that effect,
with reference to Directive 95/46,Lindqvist, paragraph 82).

67 As to those directives, their provisionsare relatively
general, since they have to be applied to a large number of
different situations which may arise in any of theMember
States. They therefore logically include rules which leave the
Member States with the necessary discretion to define
transposition measures which may be adapted to the various
situations possible (see, to that effect,Lindqvist, paragraph
84).

68 That being so, the Member States must, when transposing the
directives mentioned above, take care to rely on an
interpretation of the directives which allows a fair balance to
be struck between the various fundamental rights protected by
the Community legal order. Further, when implementing the
measures transposing those directives, the authorities and
courts of the Member States mustnot only interpret their
national law in a manner consistent with those directives but
also make sure that they do not rely on an interpretation of
them which would be in conflict with those fundamental rights
or with the other general principles of Community law, such as
the principle of proportionality (see, to that
effect,Lindqvist, paragraph 87, and Case C‑305/05Ordre des
barreaux francophones et germanophone and Others[2007] ECR
I‑0000, paragraph 28).

69 Moreover, it should be recalled here that the Community
legislature expressly required, in accordance with Article
15(1) of Directive 2002/58, that the measures referred to in
that paragraph be adopted by the Member States in compliance
with the general principles of Community law, including those
mentioned in Article 6(1) and (2) EU.

70 In the light of all the foregoing, the answer to the national
court’s question must be that Directives 2000/31, 2001/29,
2004/48 and 2002/58 do not require the Member States to lay
down, in a situation such as that in the main proceedings, an
obligation to communicate personal data in order to ensure
effective protection of copyright in the context of civil
proceedings. However, Community law requires that, when
transposing those directives, the Member States take care to
rely on an interpretation of them which allows a fair balance
to be struck between the various fundamental rights protected
by the Community legal order. Further, when implementing the
measures transposing those directives, the authorities and
courtsof the Member States must not only interpret their
national law in a manner consistent with those directives but
also make sure that they do not rely on an interpretation of
them which would be in conflict with those fundamental rights
or with the other general principles of Community law, such as
the principle of proportionality."

And they then conclude:

On those grounds, the Court (Grand Chamber) hereby rules:

Directive 2000/31/EC of the European Parliament and of the
Council of 8 June 2000 on certain legal aspects of information
society services, in particular electronic commerce, in the
Internal Market (‘Directive on electronic commerce’), Directive
2001/29/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 22
May 2001 on the harmonisation of certain aspects of copyright
and related rights in the information society, Directive
2004/48/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 29
April 2004 on the enforcement of intellectual property rights,
and Directive 2002/58/EC of the European Parliament and of the
Council of 12 July 2002 concerning the processing of personal
data and the protection of privacy in the electronic
communications sector (Directive on privacy and electronic
communications) do not require the Member States to lay down,
in a situation such as that in the main proceedings, an
obligation to communicate personal data in order to ensure
effective protection of copyright in the context of civil
proceedings. However, Community law requires that, when
transposing those directives, the Member States take care to
rely on an interpretation of them which allows a fair balance
to be struck between the various fundamental rights protected
by the Community legal order. Further, when implementing the
measures transposing those directives, the authorities and
courts of the Member States must not only interpret their
national law in a manner consistent with those directives but
also make sure that they do not rely on an interpretation of
them which would be in conflict with those fundamental rights
orwith the other general principles of Community law, such as
the principle of proportionality.

76. In particular, is the current legal framework clear enough
to allow for sufficient involvement of intermediaries (such as
Internet service providers, advertising brokers, payment
service providers, domain name registrars, etc.) in inhibiting
online copyright infringements with a commercial purpose? If
not, what measures would be useful to foster the cooperation of
intermediaries?

[Open question]

It shouldbe no part of the function of intermediaries such as
ISPs or domain name registrars to act as copyright police. The
fact that many jurisdictions approach to the widespread
copyright infringement on peer-to-peer services on the internet
is to introduce three-strikes regimes (e.g. France) implemented
through ISP policing is to be lamented.

If intermediaries are to be liable for policing potentially
infringing content on the Internet, that has a significant
commercial cost and consequent downstream consumer and societal
welfare cost. E.g. is it truly proportionate for someone to lose
access to the internet for infringing copyright? It is unlikely
these costs are outweighed by the benefit to rights-holders
derived from such ISP policing but it could be put to an
empirical test through robust empirical research.

The internet is effectively controlled by private sector
intermediaries. How, therefore, do you ensure the private
sector not only respects but also upholds the rights of users?
These private companies are not equipped to do so. They cannot
be expected to make subtle human rights judgements. They are in
business to make money so neither are they motivated to protect
the rights of users. If commercial or legal pressure says they
should block access to certain websites or throttle a
customer's internet service for copyright reasons then that is
the route that will be taken, regardless of the individual
rights that may be infringed.In many online contexts punishment
is arbitrary, lacks transparency, lacks dueprocess, with limited
access to remedies or appeals. Arguably this is the case with
the 3 strikes process in France or the 6 strikes process in the
US. That is not an environment in which human rights will be
respected and so intermediaries like the telecoms companies and
ISPs need support in protecting fundamental rights if they are
to be obliged to be copyright police.

77. Does the current civil enforcement framework ensure that the
right balance is achieved between the right to have one’s
copyright respected and other rights such as the protection of
private life and protection of personal data?

 NO

VII.A single EU Copyright Title

78. Should the EU pursue the establishment of a single EU
Copyright Title, as a means of establishing a
consistentframework for rights and exceptions to copyright
across the EU, as well as a single framework for enforcement?

Probably not. Copyright regulations are incredibly complicated.
It would be impossible to predict the consequences of getting
from the current chaotic multi-jurisdictional approach to a
single EU copyright title for

creators

economic agents

society

As an old friend of mine would say, if I was going there I
wouldn't start from here. I would not dismiss the idea
entirely, given the potential to simplify copyright regulations
generally. However, there are a vast number of complex and
contentious issues relating to copyright that it may prove
necessary to address before attempting such a move.

79. Should this be the next step in the development of copyright
in the EU? Does the current level of difference among the Member
State legislation mean that this is a longer term project?

[Open question]

Almost certainly a longer term project if the case can be made.

VIII.Other issues

80. Are there any otherimportant matters related to the EU legal
framework for copyright? Please explain and indicate how such
matters should be addressed.

[Open question]

I don't have anything further to add at the moment. Given the
shortness of time I have not provided a comprehensive list of
references for all of my answers above but would be happy to do
so at a later date if required.

Thanks for the opportunity to contribute to this consultation
and for your attention if you have managed to get through all
or even just some my comments.

