


Public Consultation

on the review of the EU copyright rules

Contents

I.  Introduction  2

A.  Context ofthe consultation  2

B.  How to submit replies to this questionnaire  3

C.  Confidentiality  3

II.  Rights and the functioning of the Single Market  7

A.  Why is it not possible to access many online content
services from anywhere in Europe?  7

B.  Is there a need for more clarity as regards the scope of
what needs to be authorised (or not) in digital transmissions?
10

1.  The act of “making available”  10

2.  Two rights involved in a single act of exploitation  11

3.  Linking and browsing  12

4.  Download to own digital content  13

C.  Registration of works and other subject matter – is it a
good idea?  14

D.  How to improve the use and interoperability ofidentifiers
15

E.  Term of protection – is it appropriate?  15

III.  Limitations and exceptions in the Single Market  16

A.  Access to content in libraries andarchives  19

1.  Preservation and archiving  19

2.  Off-premises access to library collections  20

3.  E – lending  21

4.  Massdigitisation  22

B.  Teaching  23

C.  Research  25

D.  Disabilities  25

E.  Text and data mining  27

F.  User-generated content  28

IV.  Private copying and reprography  31

V.  Fair remuneration of authors and performers  33

VI.  Respect for rights  34

VII.  A single EU Copyright Title  36

VIII.  Other issues  36

Introduction

Context of the consultation

Over the last two decades, digital technology and the Internet
have reshaped the ways in which content iscreated, distributed,
and accessed. New opportunities have materialised for those that
create and produce content (e.g. a film, a novel, a song), for
new and existing distribution platforms, for institutions such
as libraries, for activities such as research and for citizens
who now expect to be able to access content – for information,
education or entertainment purposes – regardless of
geographical borders.

This new environment also presents challenges. One of them is
for the market to continue to adaptto new forms of distribution
and use. Another one is for the legislator to ensure that the
system of rights, limitations to rights and enforcement remains
appropriate and is adapted to the new environment. This
consultation focuses on the second of these challenges:
ensuring that the EU copyright regulatory framework stays fit
for purpose in the digital environment to support creation and
innovation, tap the full potential of the Single Market, foster
growth and investment in our economy and promote cultural
diversity.

In its "Communication on Content in the Digital Single Market"1

COM (2012)789 final, 18/12/2012.

the Commission set out two parallel tracks of action:on the one
hand, to complete its on-going effort to review and to
modernise the EU copyright legislative framework2

As announced in the Intellectual Property Strategy ' A single
market for Intellectual Property Rights: COM (2011)287 final,
24/05/2011.

3

"Based on market studies and impact assessment and legal
drafting work"as announced in the Communication (2012)789.

with a view to a decision in 2014 on whether to table
legislative reform proposals, andon the other, to facilitate
practical industry-led solutions through the stakeholder
dialogue "Licences for Europe" on issues on which rapidprogress
was deemed necessary and possible.

The "Licences for Europe" process has been finalised now4

See the document “Licences for Europe – tem pledges to bring
more content
online”:http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/copyright/docs/licences-for-europe/131113_ten-pledges_en.pdf.

. The Commission welcomes the practical solutions stakeholders
have put forward in this context and will monitor their
progress. Pledges have been made by stakeholders in all four
Working Groups (cross border portability of services,
user-generated content, audiovisual and film heritage and text
and data mining). Taken together, the Commission expects these
pledges to be a further step in making the user environment
easier in many different situations. The Commission also takes
note of the fact that two groups – user-generated content and
text and datamining – did not reach consensus among
participating stakeholders on either the problems to be
addressed or on the results. The discussions and results of
"Licences for Europe" will be also taken into account in the
context of the review of the legislative framework.

As part of the review process, the Commission is now launching a
public consultation on issues identified in the Communication on
Content in the Digital Single Market, i.e.:"territoriality in
the Internal Market, harmonisation, limitations and exceptions
to copyright in the digital age; fragmentation of the EU
copyright market; and how to improve the effectiveness and
efficiency of enforcement while underpinning its legitimacy in
the wider context of copyright reform". As highlighted in the
October 2013 European CouncilConclusions5

EUCO 169/13, 24/25 October 2013.

"Providing digital services and content across the single market
requires the establishment of a copyright regime for the digital
age. The Commission will therefore complete its on-going review
of the EU copyright framework in spring 2014. It is important
to modernise Europe's copyright regime and facilitate
licensing, while ensuring a high level protection of
intellectual property rights and taking into account cultural
diversity".

This consultation builds on previous consultations and public
hearings, in particular those on the "Green Paper on copyright
in the knowledge economy"6

COM(2008)
466/3,http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/copyright/copyright-infso/index_en.htm#maincontentSec2.

, the "Green Paper on the online distribution of audiovisual
works"7

COM(2011) 427
final,http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/consultations/2011/audiovisual_en.htm.

and "Content Online"8

http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/consultations/2009/content_online_en.htm.

. These consultations provided valuable feedback from
stakeholders on a number of questions, on issues as diverse as
the territoriality of copyright and possible ways to overcome
territoriality, exceptions related to the online dissemination
of knowledge, and rightholders’ remuneration, particularly in
the audiovisual sector. Views were expressed by stakeholders
representing all stages in the value chain, including right
holders, distributors, consumers, and academics. The questions
elicited widely diverging views on the best way to proceed. The
"Green Paper on Copyright in the Knowledge Economy" was followed
up by a Communication. The replies to the "Green Paper on the
online distribution of audiovisual works" have fed into
subsequent discussions on the Collective Rights Management
Directive and into the current review process.

How to submit replies to this questionnaire

You are kindly asked to send your repliesby 5 February 2014as a
word or pdf document to the following e-mail address of DG
Internal Market and
Services:markt-copyright-consultation@ec.europa.eu. Please note
that replies sent after that date will not be taken into
account.

This consultation is addressed to different categories of
stakeholders. To the extent possible, the questions indicate
the category/ies of respondents most likely to be concerned by
them (annotation in brackets, before the actual question).
Respondents should nevertheless feel free to reply to any/all
of the questions. Also, please note that, apart from the
question concerning the identification of the respondent, none
of the questions is obligatory. Replies containing answers only
to part of the questions will be also accepted.

You are requested to provide your answers directly within this
consultation document. For the “Yes/No/No opinion” questions
please put the selected answer inboldandunderlineit so it is
easy for us to see your selection.

In your answers to the questions, you are invited to refer to
the situation in EU Member States.You are also invited in
particular to indicate, where relevant, what would be the
impact of options you put forward in terms of costs,
opportunitiesand revenues.

The public consultation is available in English. Responses may,
however, be sent in any of the 24 official languages of the EU.

Confidentiality

The contributions received in this round of consultation as well
as a summary report presenting the responses in a statistical
and aggregated form will be published on the website of DG
MARKT.

Please note that all contributions received will be published
together with the identity of the contributor, unless the
contributor objects to the publication of their personal data
on the grounds that such publication would harm his or her
legitimate interests. In this case, the contribution will be
published in anonymous form upon the contributor's explicit
request. Otherwise the contribution will not be published nor
will its content be reflected in the summary report.

Pleaseread ourPrivacy statement.

Please identify yourself:

Name:

Cd25a

In the interests of transparency, organisations (including, for
example, NGOs, trade associations and commercial enterprises)
are invited to provide the public with relevant information
about themselves by registering in the Interest Representative
Register and subscribing to its Code of Conduct.

If you are a Registered organisation, please indicate your
Register ID number below. Your contribution will then be
considered as representing the views of your organisation.

…………………………………………………………………………………………………..

…………………………………………………………………………………………………..

If your organisation is not registered, you have the opportunity
toregister now. Responses from organisations not registered will
be published separately.

If you would like to submit your reply on an anonymous basis
please indicate it belowby underlining the following answer:

Yes, I would like to submit my reply on an anonymous basis

Type of respondent(Pleaseunderlinethe appropriate):

End user/consumer(e.g. internet user, reader, subscriber to
music or audiovisual service, researcher, student) OR
Representative of end users/consumers

for the purposes of this questionnaire normally referred to
in questions as"end users/consumers"

Institutional user(e.g. school, university, research centre,
library, archive) OR Representative of institutional users

for the purposes of this questionnaire normally referred to
in questions as"institutional users"

Author/Performer ORRepresentative of authors/performers

Publisher/Producer/Broadcaster OR Representative of
publishers/producers/broadcasters

the two above categoriesare,for the purposes of this
questionnaire, normally referred to in questions as"right
holders"

Intermediary/Distributor/Other service provider(e.g. online
music or audiovisual service, games platform, social media,
search engine, ICT industry)OR Representative of
intermediaries/distributors/other service providers

for the purposes of this questionnaire normally referred to
in questions as"service providers"

Collective Management Organisation

Public authority

Member State

Other(Please explain):

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Rights and the functioningof the Single Market

Why is it not possible to access many online content services
from anywhere in Europe?[The territorial scope of the rights
involved in digital transmissions and the segmentation of the
market through licensing agreements]

Holders of copyright and related rights – e.g. writers, singers,
musicians - do not enjoy a single protection in the EU. Instead,
they are protected on the basis of a bundle of national rights
in each Member State. Those rights have been largely harmonised
by the existing EU Directives. However, differences remain and
the geographical scope of the rights is limited to the
territory of the Member State granting them. Copyright is thus
territorial in the sense that rights are acquired and enforced
on a country-by-country basis under national law9

This principle has been confirmed by the Court of justice on
several occasions.

.

The dissemination of copyright-protected content on the Internet
– e.g. by a music streaming service, or by an online e-book
seller – therefore requires, in principle, an authorisation for
each national territory in which the content is communicated to
the public. Rightholders are, of course, in a position to grant
a multi-territorial or pan-European licence, such that content
services can be provided in several Member States and across
borders. A number of steps have been taken at EU level to
facilitate multi-territorial licences: the proposal for a
Directive on Collective Rights Management10

Proposal for a Directive of the European Parliamentand of the
Council of 11 July 2012 on collective management of copyright
and related rights and multi-territorial licensing of rights in
musical works for online uses in the internal market, COM(2012)
372 final.

should significantly facilitate the deliveryof multi-territorial
licences in musical works for online services11

Collective Management Organisations play a significant role in
the management of online rights for musical works in contrast
to the situation where online rights are licensed directlyby
right holders such as film or record producers or by newspaper
or book publishers.

; the structured stakeholder dialogue “Licences for Europe”12

You can find more information on the following website:
http://ec.europa.eu/licences-for-europe-dialogue/.

and market-led developments such as the on-going work in the
Linked Content Coalition13

You can find more information on the following
website:http://www.linkedcontentcoalition.org/.

.

"Licences for Europe" addressed in particular the specific issue
of cross-border portability, i.e. the ability of consumers
having subscribed to online services in their Member State to
keep accessing them when travelling temporarily to other Member
States. As a result, representatives of the audio-visual sector
issued a joint statement affirming their commitment to continue
working towards the further development of cross-border
portability14

See the document “Licences for Europe – tem pledges to bring
more content
online”:http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/copyright/docs/licences-for-europe/131113_ten-pledges_en.pdf.

.

Despite progress, there are continued problems with the
cross-border provision of, and access to, services. These
problems are most obvious to consumers wanting to access
services that are made available in Member States other than
the one in which they live. Not all online services are
available in all Member States and consumers face problems when
trying to access such services across borders. In some
instances, even if the “same” service is available in all
Member States, consumers cannot access the service across
borders (they can only access their “national” service, and if
they try to access the "same" service in another Member State
they are redirected to the one designatedfor their country of
residence).

This situation may in part stem from the territoriality of
rights and difficulties associated with the clearing of rights
in different territories. Contractual clauses in licensing
agreements between right holders and distributors and/or
between distributors and end users may also be at the origin of
some of the problems (denial of access, redirection).

The main issue at stake here is, therefore, whether further
measures (legislative or non-legislative, including
market-ledsolutions) need to be taken at EU level in the medium
term15

For possible long term measures such as the establishment of a
European Copyright Code (establishing a single title) see
section VII of this consultation document.

to increase the cross-borderavailability of content services in
the Single Market, while ensuring an adequate level of
protection for right holders.

[In particular if you are an end user/consumer:]Have you faced
problems when trying to access online services in an EU Member
State other than the one in which you live?

 YES - Please provide examples indicating the Member State,
the sector and the type of content concerned (e.g. premium
content such as certain films and TV series, audio-visual
content in general, music, e-books,magazines, journals and
newspapers, games, applications and other software)

The European Union is made of Member-States bound by national
borders that often overlap common languages areas, such as
Belgium that forms one country with three official languages
(French, Dutch and German). And in the north of Europe there is
a Sami population that share the same language (Sami) across
Norway, Sweden and Finland. Border zones also host minority
populations that sometimes form big communities, such as the
Danish-speaking people of Schleswig-Holstein in Germany. These
quick examples show that the problem encountered by many people
willing to access online content in Europe is not a consumer
problem but a citizen problem rooted in European history. One
of the missions of libraries as public institutions is to
provide users with access to content in their own languages.
This was not a problem in the printing environment, but it has
become a problem in the online environment. For instance
Swedish citizens duly registered in the public library of
Helsingør (Elsinore), Denmark can borrow physical documents
(books, DVD’s, Cd’s) and go back home in Sweden and enjoy them.
This is impossible for online content (e-books, movies…). To the
detriment of users, online service provision is being hampered
by copyright rules.

 NO

 NO OPINION

[In particular if you are a service provider:]Have you faced
problems when seeking to provide online services across borders
in the EU?

 YES - Please explain whether such problems, in your
experience, are related to copyright or to other issues (e.g.
business decisions relating to the cost of providing services
across borders, compliance with other laws such as consumer
protection)? Please provide examples indicating the Member
State, the sector and the type of content concerned (e.g.
premium content such as certain films and TV series,
audio-visual content in general, music, e-books, magazines,
journals and newspapers, games, applications and other
software).

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO

 NO OPINION

[In particular if you are a right holder or a collective
management organisation:]How often are you asked to grant
multi-territorial licences? Please indicate, if possible, the
number ofrequests per year and provide examples indicating the
Member State, the sector and the type of content concerned.

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

If you have identified problems in the answersto any of the
questions above – what would be the best way to tackle them?

[Open question]

It should be addressed in EU legislation the necessity to grant
new rights to libraries in the form of exceptions and
limitations to copyright in order to: - reinstate a true
balance of rights between the exclusive rights of the rights
holders and other fundamental rights; - ensure that licences
don’t override existing exceptions and limitations to
copyright.

[In particular if you are a right holder or acollective
management organisation:]Are there reasons why, even in cases
where you hold all the necessary rights for all the territories
in question, you would still find it necessary or justified to
impose territorial restrictions on a service provider (in
order, for instance, to ensure that access to certain content
is not possible in certain European countries)?

 YES – Please explain by giving examples

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO

 NO OPINION

[Inparticular if you are e.g. a broadcaster or a service
provider:]Are there reasons why, even in cases where you have
acquired all the necessary rights for all the territories in
question, you would still find it necessary or justified to
impose territorialrestrictions on the service recipient (in
order for instance, to redirect the consumer to a different
website than the one he is trying to access)?

 YES – Please explain by giving examples

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO

 NO OPINION

Do you think that further measures (legislative or
non-legislative, including market-led solutions) are needed at
EU level to increase the cross-border availability of content
services in the Single Market, while ensuring an adequate level
of protection for right holders?

 YES – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NOOPINION

Is there a need for more clarity as regards the scope of what
needs to be authorised (or not) in digital transmissions?[The
definition of the rights involved in digital transmissions]

The EU framework for the protection of copyright and related
rights in the digital environment is largely established by
Directive 2001/29/EC16

Directive 2001/29/EC of the European Parliament and of the
Council of 22 May 2001 on the harmonisation of certain aspects
of copyright and related rights in the information society.

on the harmonisation of certain aspects of copyright and related
rights in the information society. OtherEU directives in this
field that are relevant in the online environment are those
relating to the protection of software17

Directive 2009/24/EC of the European Parliament and of the
Council of 23 April 2009 on the legal protection of computer
programs.

and databases18

Directive 96/9/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council
of 11 March 1996 on the legal protection of databases.

.

Directive 2001/29/ECharmonises the rights of authors and
neighbouring rightholders19

Film and record producers, performers and broadcasters are
holders of so-called “neighbouring rights” in, respectively,
their films, records, performances and broadcast. Authors’
content protected by copyright is referred to as a “work” or
“works”, while content protected by neighbouring rights is
referred to as “other subject matter”.

which are essential for the transmission of digital copies of
works (e.g. an e-book) and otherprotected subject matter (e.g.
a record in a MP3 format) over the internet or similar digital
networks.

The most relevant rights for digital transmissions are the
reproduction right, i.e. the right to authorise or prohibit the
making of copies20

The right to “authorise or prohibit direct or indirect,
temporary or permanent reproduction by any means and in any
form, in whole or in part” (see Art. 2 of Directive 2001/29/EC)
although temporary acts of reproduction of a transient or
incidental nature are, under certain conditions, excluded (see
art. 5(1) of Directive 2001/29/EC).

, (notably relevant at the start of the transmission – e.g. the
uploading of a digital copy of a work to a server in view of
making it available – and at the users’ end – e.g. whena user
downloads a digital copy of a work) and thecommunication to the
public/making available right, i.e. the rights to authorise or
prohibit the dissemination of the works in digital networks21

The right to authorise or prohibit any communication tothe
public by wire or wireless means and to authorise or prohibit
the making available to the public “on demand” (see Art. 3 of
Directive 2001/29/EC).

. These rights are intrinsically linked in digital transmissions
and both need to be cleared.

The act of “making available”

Directive 2001/29/EC specifies neitherwhatis covered by the
making available right (e.g. the upload, the accessibility by
the public, the actual reception by the public) norwherethe act
of “making available” takes place. This does not raise questions
if the act is limited to a single territory. Questions arise
however when the transmission covers several territories and
rights need to be cleared (does the act of "making available"
happen in the country of the upload only? in each of the
countries where the content is potentially accessible? in each
of the countries where the content is effectively accessed?).
The most recent case law of the Court of Justice of the
European Union (CJEU) suggests that a relevant criterion is the
“targeting” of a certain Member State's public22

See in particular Case C-173/11 (Football Dataco vs Sportradar)
and Case C-5/11 (Donner) for copyright and related rights, and
Case C-324/09 (L’Oréal vs eBay) for trademarks. With regard to
jurisdiction see also joined Cases C-585/08 and C-144/09
(Pammer and Hotel Alpenhof) and pending CaseC-441/13 (Pez
Hejduk); see however, adopting a different approach, Case
C-170/12 (Pinckney vs KDG Mediatech).

. According to this approach the copyright-relevant act (which
has tobe licensed) occurs at least in those countries which are
“targeted” by the online service provider. A service provider
“targets” a group of customers residing in a specific country
when it directs its activity to that group, e.g. via
advertisement, promotions, a language or a currency
specifically targeted at that group.

Is the scope of the “making available” right in cross-border
situations – i.e. when content is disseminated across borders –
sufficiently clear?

 YES

 NO – Please explain how thiscould be clarified and what type
of clarification would be required (e.g. as in "targeting"
approach explained above, as in "country of origin" approach23

The objective of implementing a “country of origin” approach is
to localise the copyright relevant act that must be licenced in
a single Member State (the "country of origin", which could be
for example the Member State in which the content is uploaded
or where the service provider is established), regardless of in
how many Member States the work can beaccessed or received. Such
an approach has already been introduced at EU level with regard
to broadcasting by satellite (see Directive 93/83/EEC on the
coordination of certain rules concerning copyright and rights
related to copyright applicable to satellite broadcasting and
cable retransmission).

)

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO OPINION

[In particular if you are a right holder:]Could a clarification
of the territorial scope of the “making available” righthave an
effect on the recognition of your rights (e.g. whether you are
considered to be an author or not, whether you are considered
to have transferred your rights or not), on your remuneration,
or on the enforcement of rights (including the availabilityof
injunctive relief24

Injunctive relief is a temporary or permanent remedy allowing
the right holder to stop or prevent an infringement of his/her
right.

)?

 YES – Please explain how such potential effects could be
addressed

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO

 NO OPINION

Two rights involved in a single act of exploitation

Each act of transmission in digital networks entails (in the
current state of technology and law) several reproductions.
This means thatthere are two rights that apply to digital
transmissions: the reproduction right and the making available
right. This may complicate the licensing of works for online
use notably when the two rights are held by different
persons/entities.

[In particular if you a service provider or a right holder:]Does
the application of two rights to a single act of economic
exploitation in the online environment (e.g. a download) create
problems for you?

 YES – Please explain what type of measures would be needed
in order to address such problems (e.g. facilitation of joint
licences when the rights are in different hands, legislation to
achieve the "bundling of rights")

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO

 NO OPINION

Linking and browsing

Hyperlinks are references to data that lead a user from one
location in the Internet to another. They are indispensable for
the functioning of the Internet as a network. Several cases are
pending before the CJEU25

Cases C-466/12 (Svensson), C-348/13 (Bestwater International)
and C-279/13 (C More entertainment).

in which the question has been raised whether the provision of
a clickable link constitutes an act of communication to the
public/making available to the public subject to the
authorisation of the rightholder.

A user browsing the internet (e.g. viewing a web-page) regularly
creates temporary copies of works and other subject-matter
protected under copyright on the screen and in the 'cache'
memory of his computer. A questionhas been referred to the
CJEU26

Case C-360/13 (Public Relations Consultants Association Ltd).
See
alsohttp://www.supremecourt.gov.uk/decided-cases/docs/UKSC_2011_0202_PressSummary.pdf.

as to whether such copies are always covered by the mandatory
exception for temporary acts of reproduction provided for in
Article 5(1) of Directive 2001/29/EC.

Should the provision of a hyperlink leading to a work or
othersubject matter protected under copyright, either in
general or under specific circumstances, be subject to the
authorisation of the rightholder?

 YES – Please explain whether you consider this to be the
case in general, or under specific circumstances,and why

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO – Please explain whether you consider this to be the case
in general, or under specific circumstances, and why (e.g.
because it does not amount to an act of communication to the
public – or to a new public, or because it should be covered by
a copyright exception)

Hyperlink should not be subject to the authorisation of the
rightholder for content legally accessible on the Internet. Two
kind of hyperlinks exist. The first one consists of a metadata
element that leads to a content on another website and the
second one consists of a hyperlink that directly integrates
content in another website than where it originates from
(embedded link or framing). The first hyperlink should not be
subject to authorisation, while the second hyperlink is not a
problem of the link itself (which is only the technical means
for the appropriation (or possibly misappropriation) of
content), but a legal issue that can be dealt with by the
generalrules of copyright and/or competition right, as many
court cases have already done (mainly prohibiting framing or
inline linking without source identification). By default,
hyperlinks should not be subject to authorisation and if
necessary their use should be covered by exceptions and
limitations.

 NO OPINION

Should the viewing of a web-page where this implies the
temporary reproduction of a work or other subject matter
protected under copyright on the screen and in the cache memory
of the user’s computer, either in general or under specific
circumstances, be subject to the authorisation of the
rightholder?

 YES – Please explain whether you consider this to be the
case in general, or under specific circumstances, and why

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO – Please explain whether you consider this to be the case
in general, or under specific circumstances, and why (e.g.
because it is or should be covered by a copyright exception)

Content legallyaccessible on the Internet should be considered
exempted of authorisation of the right holder by default. The
purpose of the Internet is the communication to the public. In
this situation, there shouldn’t be any request of rightholders
authorisation.

 NO OPINION

Download to own digital content

Digital content is increasingly being bought via digital
transmission (e.g. download to own). Questions arise as to the
possibility for users to dispose of the files they buy in this
manner (e.g. by selling them or by giving them as a gift). The
principle of EU exhaustion of the distribution right applies in
the case of the distribution of physical copies (e.g. when a
tangiblearticle such as a CD or a book, etc. is sold, the right
holder cannot prevent the furtherdistribution of that tangible
article)27

See also recital 28 of Directive 2001/29/EC.

. The issue that arises here is whether this principle can also
be applied in the case of an act of transmission equivalent in
its effect to distribution (i.e. where thebuyer acquires the
property of the copy)28

In Case C-128/11 (Oracle vs. UsedSoft) the CJEU ruled that an
author cannot oppose the resale of a second-hand licence that
allows downloading his computer program from his website and
using it for an unlimitedperiod of time. The exclusive right of
distribution of a copy of a computer program covered by such a
licence is exhausted on its first sale. While it is thus
admitted that the distribution right may be subject to
exhaustion in case of computer programs offered for download
with the right holder’s consent, the Court was careful to
emphasise that it reached this decision based on the Computer
Programs Directive. It was stressed that this exhaustion rule
constituted alex specialisin relation to the Information
Society Directive (UsedSoft, par. 51, 56).

. This raises difficult questions, notably relating to the
practical application of such an approach (how to avoid
re-sellers keeping and using a copy of a work after they have
“re-sold” it – this is often referred to as the “forward and
delete” question) as well as to the economic implications of
the creation of a second-hand market of copies of perfect
quality that never deteriorate (in contrast to the second-hand
market for physical goods).

[In particularif you are an end user/consumer:]Have you faced
restrictions when trying to resell digital files that you have
purchased (e.g. mp3 file, e-book)?

 YES – Please explain by giving examples

Libraries are not interested in reselling, but in re-use
forcultural and scientific purposes. The problem is that any
kind of use of digital content are entirely dependent on the
rules set by the publisher, operating by licenses and
technological protection measures. Cultural content in any form
of distribution should be treated by the law for what they are -
content and not temporary services.

 NO

 NO OPINION

[In particular if you are a right holder or a service provider:]
What would be the consequences of providing a legal framework
enabling the resale of previously purchased digital content?
Please specify per market (type of content) concerned.

[Open question]

No opinion

Registration of works and other subject matter – is it a good
idea?

Registration is not often discussed in copyright in the EU as
the existing international treaties in the area prohibit
formalities as a condition for the protection and exercise of
rights. However, this prohibition is not absolute29

For example, it does not affect “domestic” works – i.e. works
originating in the countryimposing the formalities as opposed
to works originating in another country.

. Moreover a system of registration does not need to be made
compulsory or constitute a precondition for the protection and
exercise of rights. With a longer term of protection andwith
the increased opportunities that digital technology provides
for the use of content (including older works and works that
otherwise would nothave been disseminated), the advantages and
disadvantages of a system of registration are increasingly
beingconsidered30

On the basis of Article 3.6 of the Directive 2012/28/EU of the
European Parliament and of the Council of 25 October 2012 on
certain permitted uses of orphan works, a publicly accessible
online database is currently being set up by the Officefor
Harmonisation of the Internal Market (OHIM) for the
registration of orphan works.

.

Would the creation of a registration system at EU level help in
the identification and licensing of works and other subject
matter?

 YES

 NO

 NO OPINION

Whatwould be the possible advantages of such a system?

[Open question]

No opinion

What would be the possible disadvantages of such a system?

[Open question]

No opinion

What incentives for registration by rightholders could be
envisaged?

[Open question]

No opinion

How to improve the use and interoperability of identifiers

There are many private databases of works and other subject
matter held by producers, collective management organisations,
and institutions such as libraries, which are based toa greater
or lesser extent on the use of (more or less) interoperable,
internationally agreed ‘identifiers’. Identifiers can be
compared to a reference number embedded in a work, are specific
to the sector in which they have been developed31

E.g. the International Standard Recording Code (ISRC) is used to
identify recordings, the International Standard Book Number
(ISBN) is used to identify books.

, and identify, variously, the work itself, the owner or the
contributor to a work or other subject matter. There are
notable examples of where industry is undertaking actions to
improve the interoperability of such identifiers and databases.
The Global Repertoire Database32

You will find more information about this initiative on the
following website:http://www.globalrepertoiredatabase.com/.

should, once operational, provide a single source of information
on the ownership and control of musical works worldwide.
TheLinked Content Coalition33

You will findmore information about this initiative (funded in
part by the European Commission) on the following website:
www.linkedcontentcoalition.org.

was established to develop building blocks for the expression
and management of rights and licensing across all content and
media types. It includes the development of a Rights Reference
Model (RRM) – a comprehensive data model for all types of
rights in all types of content. The UK Copyright Hub34

You will find more information about this initiative on the
followingwebsite:http://www.copyrighthub.co.uk/.

is seeking to take such identification systems a step further,
and to create a linked platform, enabling automated licensing
across different sectors.

What should be the role of the EU in promoting the adoption
of identifiers in the content sector, and in promoting the
development and interoperability of rights ownership and
permissions databases?

[Open question]

The European Union should ensure that: (1) identifiersas well as
rights ownership and permission databases should avail open
access, based on open standards, and (2) all identifiers as
well as rights ownership and permission databases are
interoperable across all of Europe (and beyond). Any system
that is developed must be developed in a true multi stakeholder
approach (e.g not only by rights holders and intermediaries) and
should be reflective of work already undertaken (for example by
Europeana). Rights ownership and permission databases in
particular mustbe publicly accessible via machine readable
interfaces. They must also include the ability to store
information on out-of-copyright (Public Domain) and openly
licensed works. As an example of good practice, see the Open
Bibliographic Data Principles,
http://openbiblio.net/principles/

Term of protection – is it appropriate?

Works and other subject matter are protected under copyright for
a limited period of time. After the term of protection has
expired, a work falls into the public domain and can be freely
used by anyone (in accordance with the applicable national
rules on moral rights). The Berne Convention35

Berne Convention for the Protection of Literary and Artistic
Works,http://www.wipo.int/treaties/en/ip/berne/.

requires a minimum term of protection of 50 years after the
death of the author. The EU rules extend this term of
protection to 70 years after the death of the author (as do
many other countries, e.g. the US).

With regard to performers in the music sector and phonogram
producers, the term provided for in the EU rules also extend 20
years beyond what is mandated in international agreements,
providing for a term of protection of 70 years after the first
publication. Performers and producers in the audio-visual
sector, however, do not benefit from such an extended term of
protection.

Are the current terms of copyright protection still appropriate
in the digital environment?

 YES – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO – Please explain if they should be longer or shorter

The term of protection expanded right after 1993 in many EU
countries from 50 to 70 years after the death of the author,
implementing an EU directive on harmonisation of the term of
protection [reference of the Directive]. The EU harmonised the
term of protection on the longer term applied by one of its
member state, Germany (70 years) although the Berne convention
only requires 50 years. 70years is a very long time, and it
must be reduced to enable and ensure better access to
information, knowledge and culture. Very few works have a
commercial life beyond a couple of decades. Excessively long
terms of protection produce problems for many legitimate uses
of copyrighted material e.g. in the form of cumbersome or
non-existing clearance mechanisms for use. Time of protection
should not be longer than 50 years after the death of the
author. This could be a first step towards a more significant
reduction of term of protection that would require a revision
of the Berne convention.

 NO OPINION

Limitations and exceptions in the Single Market

Limitations and exceptions to copyright and related rights
enable the use of works and other protectedsubject-matter,
without obtaining authorisation from the rightholders, for
certain purposes and to a certain extent (for instance the use
for illustration purposes of an extract from a novel by a
teacher in a literature class). At EU level they are
established in a number of copyright directives, most notably
Directive 2001/29/EC36

Plus Directive 96/9/ECon the legal protection of
databases;Directive 2009/24/ECon the legal protection of
computer programs,and Directive 92/100/ECon rental right and
lending right.

.

Exceptions and limitations in the national and EU copyright laws
have to respect international law37

Article 9(2) of the Berne Convention for the Protection of
Literary and Artistic Works (1971); Article 13 of the TRIPS
Agreement (Trade Related Intellectual Property Rights) 1994;
Article 16(2) of the WIPO Performers and Phonograms Treaty
(1996); Article 9(2) of the WIPO Copyright Treaty (1996).

. In accordance with international obligations, the EU acquis
requires that limitations and exceptions can only be applied in
certain special cases which do not conflict with a normal
exploitation of the work or other subject matter and do not
unreasonably prejudice the legitimate interest of the
rightholders.

Whereas the catalogue of limitations and exceptions included in
EU law is exhaustive (no other exceptions can be applied to the
rights harmonised at EU level)38

Other than the grandfathering of the exceptions of minor
importance for analogue uses existing in Member States at the
time of adoption ofDirective 2001/29/EC (see, Art. 5(3)(o)).

, these limitations and exceptions are often optional39

With the exception of certain limitations: (i) in the Computer
Programs Directive, (ii) in the Database Directive, (iii)
Article 5(1) in the Directive 2001/29/EC and (iv) the Orphan
Works Directive.

, in the sense that Member States are free to reflect in
national legislation as many or as few of them as they wish.
Moreover, the formulation of certain of the limitations and
exceptions is general enough to givesignificant flexibility to
the Member States as to how, and to what extent, to implement
them (if they decide to do so). Finally, it is worth noting
that not all of the limitations and exceptions included in the
EU legal framework for copyright are of equivalent significance
in policy terms and in terms of their potential effect on the
functioning of the Single Market.

In addition, in the same manner that the definition of the
rights is territorial (i.e. has an effect only within the
territory of the Member State), the definition of the
limitations and exceptions to the rights is territorial too (so
an act that is covered by an exception in a Member State "A"may
still require the authorisation of the rightholder once we move
to the Member State "B")40

Only the exception established in the recent Orphan Works
Directive (a mandatory exception to copyright and related
rights in the case where the rightholders are not known or
cannot be located) has been given a cross-border effect, which
means that, for instance, once a literary work – for instance a
novel – is considered an orphan work in a Member State, that
same novel shall be considered an orphan work in all Member
States and can be used and accessed in all Member States.

.

The cross-border effect of limitations and exceptions also
raises the question of fair compensation of rightholders. In
some instances, Member States are obliged to compensate
rightholders for the harm inflicted on them by a limitation or
exception to their rights. In other instances Member States are
not obliged, but may decide, to provide for such compensation.
If a limitation or exception triggering a mechanism of fair
compensation were to be given cross-border effect (e.g. the
books are used for illustration in an online course givenby an
university in a Member State "A" and the students are in a
Member State "B") then there would also be a need to clarify
which national law should determine the level of that
compensation and who should pay it.

Finally, the question of flexibility andadaptability is being
raised: what is the best mechanism to ensure that the EU and
Member States’ regulatory frameworks adapt when necessary
(either to clarify that certain uses are covered by an
exception or to confirm that for certain uses the authorisation
of rightholders is required)? The main question here is whether
a greater degree of flexibility can be introduced in the EU and
Member States regulatory framework while ensuring the required
legal certainty, including for the functioning of the
SingleMarket, and respecting the EU's international
obligations.

Are there problems arising from the fact that most limitations
and exceptions provided in the EU copyright directives are
optional for the Member States?

 YES – Please explain by referring tospecific cases

The purpose of Directive 2001/29/EC on the harmonisation of
certain aspects of copyright and related rights in the
information society was explicitly (as its title shows) to
create more harmonisation within the EU. Ironically, it ends in
asituation of non-harmonisation. Limitations and exceptions vary
a lot from country to country. Only one exception is mandatory
today: the exception for temporary copies (whether this
exception could/should be regarded as an act of reproduction
was also discussed at WIPO in 1996) l. In addition to this
situation of non harmonisation, the list of exceptions was made
exhaustive, so no exceptions could be adjusted or expanded to
similar uses, and any new exceptions could not be added despite
the fact that the world and the information market is ever
changing. It is in the library’s missions to cooperate and
share resources across borders. For the European library
community the existence of 28 different copyright regimes with
their own exceptions makes this cooperation more difficult. One
example is that the definition of “non-commercial” differs from
country to country. The lack of harmonisation and the optional
character of the list of exceptions created an ambiguous
situation throughout the EU. Especially whenseveral
Member-States work together in cross-border projects such as: -
Europeana and all the related projects whose missions are to
give online access to European Cultural Heritage; - the
European Library; - the EU arctic centre, whose mission is,
among others to develop knowledge and spread information on the
region
http://www.arcticcentre.org/InEnglish/ABOUT-US/EU-Arctic-Information-Centre
or, - the Upper Rhin University.; - All other cross-border
projects shared by several member states trying to pool
resources to the benefit of their population and to develop
mutual understandingand reciprocal knowledge. All those
structures work with libraries that are supposed to give access
to their collection (including digital ones), but can be
forbidden to do sobecause of different copyright regimes and
absence of harmonised exceptions in the respective
member-states. In addition, this lack of harmonisation is even
more an obstacle when projects involve non-members states of
the EU.

 NO – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO OPINION

Should some/all of the exceptions be made mandatory and, if so,
is there a need for a higher level of harmonisation of such
exceptions?

 YES – Please explain by referringto specific cases

All exceptions should be made mandatory for all EU countries,
especially those for research and education, public-mission
institutions, and disability, because they protect fundamental
rights. There is no obvious reason to have only onemandatory
exception. In addition it

 NO – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO OPINION

Should any new limitations and exceptions be added to or removed
from the existing catalogue?Pleaseexplain by referring to
specific cases.

[Open question]

See question 22. All current existing exceptions have to remain.
In addition, to address technological change that has already
occurred, the revised Directive should include: a functional
exception for the mass digitisation and making available of out
of commerce works by libraries, archives and museums for
non-commercial purposes; an exception for text and data mining;
an exception for digital lending. Moreover, a more flexible and
open legislation isneeded. In particular, a “fair use”
exception, in addition to those listed in the Directives, would
ensure that the exceptions and limitations can keep pace with
technology and social changes. We do NOT want to remove already
existing exceptions, but onlyadd new ones and find a more
flexible solution than the current one. To list any new
specific exceptions that will take into account any new
development in years to come wouldn’t prove to be useful. The
list should therefore be combined with more generalprinciples
like “fair use” or “similar use”.

Independently from the questions above, is there a need to
provide for a greater degree of flexibility in the EU
regulatory framework for limitations and exceptions?

 YES – Please explain why

IIt is noteasy to answer this question independently from the
questions above. So we will repeat the need for a more flexible
and open solution. Most exceptions are too narrow and specific,
even for 2001 when they were written. The exception for
libraries, archivesand museums 5.2.(c) is more open in the way
that it allows “specific acts of reproduction made by publicly
accessible libraries, educational establishments or museums, or
by archives, which are not for direct or indirect economic or
commercial advantage”,but it is an exception for the
reproduction right ONLY, and it does not cover any other
library activity that would be considered fair use in a more
flexible legislation. One example is that the transmission of
single scanned articles or other pieces of information (like
one single scanned poem) to individual users or other
libraries, on request, is considered as communication to the
public and therefore needs to be licensed. In the analog world
this is covered by an exception in most countries. This is a
case that in our opinion clearly would pass the three step
test, as it is a specific case and does not harm the interests
of the author. Copyright exists in order to balance the rights
of authors and rights holders with those of users. This balance
has beendamaged in the past years with only the rights holders
benefiting. The main objective of copyright reform at the
European level should be to maintain those rights and
re-establish a new balance where innovation, research as well
as legal access to digitalcontent will be encouraged.
Therefore, Copyright law shall balance the right to access,
share and use copyrighted works with the author’s right to
protection and compensation. Now we have a situation of
imbalance, with the exhaustive list of non-mandatoryexceptions,
increasing terms of protection (the last one was for sound
recordings, in 2011), cumbersome, expensive and monopolistic
licensing models for libraries for electronic journals and
books. Libraries have always been important contributors to
therevenues, especially for academic and research publishers,
and are paying for what they acquire. More generally, a recent
press release of the British Library shows that “The economic
value that the library delivers is now almost five times its
costs, representing a return on investment of 5:1” and
therefore that libraries, archives and information services
have an important role to play in boosting the economy. A
competitive market can only innovate by relying on
well-educated and informed citizens and consistent investment
in libraries, archives and information services. This generates
a good return on investment and stimulates the economy. However
there is a need to establish fair conditions applying to
libraries, archives and cultural heritage institutions as a
whole and not only to rightsholders. Rules that apply in the
commercial environment (especially for films and music) shall
apply differently in public institutions that do not seek a
direct or indirect economic interest.

 NO – Please explain why

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO OPINION

If yes, what would be the best approach to provide for
flexibility? (e.g. interpretation by national courts and the
ECJ, periodic revisions of the directives,interpretations by
the Commission, built-in flexibility, e.g. in the form of a
fair-use or fair dealing provision / open norm, etc.)? Please
explain indicating what would be the relative advantages and
disadvantages of such an approach as well as its possible
effects on the functioning of the Internal Market.

[Open question]

More reliance on court decisions and case-by-case interpretation
by the Commission may be a consequence of an open norm and more
flexibility in copyright legislation. Result of Court decisions
would support better predictability of the pattern of the fair
use concept. Court cases could however be extremely costly and
should not be the only way of seeking for a solution. So, an
open ended norm reflecting the Three Step test of the
Berneconvention, i.e. a Fair use exception, should be the
necessary integration of an updated list of mandatory
exceptions, in order to have, on the one hand, a copyright
framework sufficiently well-defined to avoid uncertainty and
continuous appeals to the courts, and, on the other hand, to
avoid the rigidity of an *exhaustive* list (see also answers to
Questions 22, 23, 29 and 80).

Does the territoriality of limitations and exceptions, in your
experience, constitute a problem?

 YES – Please explain why andspecify which exceptions you are
referring to

At present, the EU only obliges EU countries to adopt one
exception (regarding temporary acts of reproduction), while the
adoption of the others is optional. As a result, something
that’s legal in one countrycould be illegal elsewhere. For
example, the UK is the only Member State without a private
copying exception, so an act that is legal in Spain or the
Netherland suddenly becomes a criminal offence in the UK.
Finland hardly has a parody exception, so a workconsidered
legal in Germany could be infringing copyright in Finland. From
a research perspective, this means that researchers have
difficulties working together and sharing knowledge across
borders. Currently, for example, inter-library loans are
hampered across borders. Right owners and service providers
based in jurisdictions with stricter user freedoms often do not
accept the wider scope of freedoms in other jurisdictions and
attempt to limit it contractually or use technical measures.
Moreover, most licences impose the law of the state of the
publisher and not that of the subscribing institution, and this
leads to the paradox that publishers from different Member
states are not subject to national laws (including exceptions
to copyright) even if they are protected by national copyright
laws. This, coupled with the fact that there cannot be a tender
among several competitors for the provision of copyright
protected content that can be provided just by a single
company, often makes it difficult for Libraries to obtain
licences really suitable to their needs, even when their
national legislation (copyright law, contract law, public
procurement law, privacy law, etc.) could provide solutions. As
an example, national legislations in most Member States
containspecific provisions on technical accessibility, but they
differ from each other both with reference to the categories of
beneficiaries and in terms of procedures to benefit. Moreover,
their application can be complicated by licensing schemes and
procedures. Art. 71-bis of the Italian Copyright Law n.
633/1941 ensures that, given certain conditions, people who
have disabilities that prevent them accessing copyright works
in their original format are able to benefit from accessible
versions of these works. And art. 4 of the Italian Law n.
4/2004 on Technical accessibility points out the obligations
and duties regarding accessibility and inclusion in the case of
public procurement of IT goods and services. In particular, when
purchasing ICT goods and services,signing contracts regarding
their development and maintenance or carrying out competitive
tenders, the accessibility requirements must always be taken
into consideration. At this point there are two different
levels of obligation: on one hand, the compliance with the
accessibility requirements is mandatory for public Web sites
(and in general for Web applications), and whenever private or
public subjects draw on public grants for the procurement of
ICT equipment and tools explicitly meant for disabled users
orworkers. Public agencies must eventually provide an adequate
justification for not taking the accessibility requirements
into account or for buying a product that fails to reach
compliance. Article 5 of the Italian Law nr.4/2004 on Technical
accessibility reminds the importance of accessibility in the
sector of education including the production of teaching tools,
courseware and electronic textbooks. Given such legislation,
licenses signed by Public bodies should contain a provision
upon which, if accessible formats are not available, format
shifting and other adaptations are permitted when necessary to
ensure technical accessibility and usability by reading
impaired authorised users. Within the limits of this purpose,
the licensor should agree to temporarily remove the technical
barriers that may prevent the adaptations needed.. But very few
standard licenses contain such provision, and there are high
transaction costs in negotiating it case by case. On the other
hand, the procedure for subscribing electronic licenses on
content covered by IP exclusive rights is often a negotiated
one without a call for competition (because of the absence of
competitors

 NO – Please explain why and specify which exceptions you are
referring to

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO OPINION

In the event that limitations and exceptions established at
national level were to have cross-border effect, how should the
question of “fair compensation” be addressed, when
suchcompensation is part of the exception? (e.g. who pays whom,
where?)

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Access to content in libraries and archives

Directive 2001/29/EC enables Member States to reflect in their
national law a range of limitations and exceptions for the
benefit of publicly accessible libraries, educational
establishments and museums, as well as archives. If
implemented, these exceptions allow acts of preservation and
archiving41

Article 5(2)c of Directive 2001/29.

and enable on-site consultation of the works and other subject
matter in the collections of such institutions42

Article 5(3)n of Directive 2001/29.

. The public lending (under an exception or limitation) by these
establishments of physical copies of works and other subject
matter is governed by the Rental and Lending Directive43

Article 5 of Directive 2006/115/EC.

.

Questions arise as to whether the current framework continues to
achieve the objectives envisaged or whetherit needs to be
clarified or updated to cover use in digital networks. At the
same time, questions arise as to the effect of such a possible
expansion on the normal exploitation of works and other subject
matter and as to the prejudice this may cause to rightholders.
The role of licensing and possible framework agreements between
different stakeholders also needs to be considered here.

Preservation and archiving

The preservation of the copies of works or other subject-matter
held in the collections ofcultural establishments (e.g. books,
records, or films) – the restoration or replacement of works,
the copying of fragile works - may involve the creation of
another copy/ies of these works or other subject matter. Most
Member States provide for an exception in their national laws
allowing for the making of such preservation copies. The scope
of the exception differs from Member State to Member State (as
regards the type of beneficiary establishments, the types of
works/subject-matter covered by the exception, the mode of
copying and the number of reproductions that a beneficiary
establishment may make). Also, the current legal status of new
types of preservation activities (e.g. harvesting and archiving
publicly available web content) is often uncertain.

(a)[In particular if you are an institutional user:]Have you
experienced specific problems when trying to use an exception
to preserve and archive specific works or other subject matter
in your collection?

(b)[In particular if you are a right holder:]Have you
experienced problems with the use by libraries, educational
establishments, museum or archives of the preservation
exception?

 YES – Please explain, by Member State, sector, and the type
of use in question.

(a) Print and analogue materials. The digitization for
preservation purposes carried out by publicly accessible
cultural institutions is implicitly included among the specific
acts of reproduction referred to in Article 5 (2) (c) of the
Infosoc Directive. In addition, the EU has repeatedly
recommended the adoption of national policies encouraging the
digitization of cultural heritage. However, this exception is
optional and it has been generally implemented under very
narrow terms, so that, in many member states, even format
shifting for preservation purpose is still prohibited, or
limited to specific formats (in input and/or output) as show
articles 68(2) and 69(2) of the Italian Copyright law. Digital
materials fixed on support. CDs and DVDs are often protected by
technological measures (TPM). The removal of TPM would require
the cooperation of the producer. Art. 6 of the Infosoc
Directive provides that technological protection measures are
protected per se, independently on the scope of protection,
entrusting to voluntary agreements or to subsidiary
interventions of Member States the adoption of appropriate
measures to ensure that legitimate users can make effective use
of licensed content. The strength of the protection of TPMs
compared with the weakness of the provision in favor of
legitimate uses has led in many Member States to the absence of
effective guarantee for legitimate users, including libraries.
As a result, many libraries are not able to preserve CDs and
DVDs legally acquired. These materials will become unusable due
to technologicalobsolescence in a few years. Subscribed online
content. In the case of online works there is no balance at
all. All the weight is on the side of the copyright holders
only. Indeed the exception provided by art. 5 (2) (c) of
Directive 2001/29 does not apply because, according to art. 6
of the Directive, it cannot provid any obligation to the
removal of TPM to the benefit of beneficiaries of exceptions
for "works or other subject-matter made available to the public
on agreed contractual terms in such a way that members of the
public may access them from a place and at a time individually
chosen by them". While the exclusive distribution right is
exhausted by the first sale in EU, so that print materials can
enter permanently into the library collection, mostcontent
provided online are offered as temporary services, ceasing upon
the expiry of the subscription. In such cases, library will have
to pay again every year to ensure access to those content. In
many cases, even when licenses provide for a perpetual right of
access in favor of the library and its users ((“post-termination
clause”), libraries cannot obtain back-up files for
conservation, but can only have access through the producer's
website, who does not give guarantees for
long-termpreservation. Fewlicenses only, negotiated by
libraries or their consortia, provide for the delivery of files
for local hosting and preservation purposes. Some others contain
a simple obligation to transfer the files in case the company
will not be able to host them. Although a single library does
not have the means to ensure the long-term digital preservation
of large amounts of resources, and the payment of an annual fee
could be justified by the fact that publishers and other
commercial providers bear the costs of storage and management
of digital content on their own platforms, Recital 16 of the
Commission Recommendation of 27 October 2011, shows that the
problem is that: In spite of progress made across the EU on the
preservation of digital material, in several Member States no
clear and comprehensive policies are in place on the
preservation of digital content. The absence of such policies
poses a threat to the survival of digitised material and may
also result in the loss of material produced in digital format
(born digital material). The development of effective means of
digital preservation has far-reaching implications that go
beyond cultural institutions. Questions of digital preservation
are relevant for any private or public organisation, which is
obliged or whichwishes to preserve digital material.
(http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=OJ:L:2011:283:0039:0045:EN:PDF).
Libraries play an important role in the network of cultural
institutions in charge of preserving nations’ history and
archives. They play a specific role in the literature and
information sector by receiving in legal deposit, keeping and
preserving, buying, organizing, promoting and giving access to
information books and literature as a whole. Their mission is
done on behalf of the general public, education and research.
Several issues are at stake now:- private companies that
license content don’t have the mission to defend or take into
account the “public interest”, “education”, or “open access to
knowledge” in their business/licence models; - Economic
sustainability of private companies that license content
doesn’t offer any long term guarantee; - The evolution of
format leads to a quick obsolescence that needs public
infrastructure to act outside of economic interest to maintain
national memories. All these issues are implicit defined
missions and policy goals for many libraries, both public and
academic.

 NO

 NO OPINION

If there are problems, how would they best be solved?

[Open question]

Art. 5(2)(c) of the 2001/29/EC shouldbe made mandatory. As the
'Study on the application of directive 2001/29/EC on copyright
and related rights in the information society' (page 301)
highlights, […]to make an exception mandatory could apply in
the case of article 5(2) c), as the developmentof digital
libraries is one of the key objectives of the Digital Agenda,
and the digitization of cultural heritage is promoted by the
Council and the Commission […]. Art. 6 of the 2001/29/EC
directive should be revised in order to enforce exceptions and
limitations and to ensure legitimate utilizations of protected
works, regardless of format or mode of dissemination. Updating
the copyright framework in order that online content is not
considered a service. Under the current terms, the copyright
frameworkconsiders online content as a (just temporary)
service. This creates a huge risk for cultural heritage
institutions, much higher than with print material, given the
extreme volatility and perishability of digital formats. It is
a fact that long-term strategies such as digital preservation
and data curation are at present largely entrusted to the
market and its fluctuations which works quasi exclusively on a
very short-term . Libraries should be granted a non-exclusive,
royalty-free, perpetual right to archive complete copies of
subscribed online materials, and to use the archivedmaterials
in the event that access on the original platform is
discontinued or suspended. An exception should ensure, at the
request of the library, the availability of back-up files for
long-term preservation, regardless of the format of
publication. That art. 5(2) c of Directive 2001/29/EC been made
mandatory and art. 6 of Directive 2001/29/EC enforces exceptions
and limitations and ensures legitimate utilizations of protected
works, regardless of format or mode of dissemination, would
support the specific public mission and responsibility of
libraries and other cultural heritage institutions that is
different from most other users of copyrighted material. As
mentioned in our answerto question 28, their main
responsibility is to preserve, organise, make available, and
promote information and literature, whose most of the content
is still copyright protected. That subscribed online content
can escape libraries preservation scheme because of the absence
of specific exceptions creates a huge risk of a 21st century
black hole where a large amount of content could disappear
forever. Short term economic interests shouldn’t limit
long-term preservation of human’s cultural heritage. An updated
copyright framework is needed to ensure specific regulation for
libraries to secure their public mission. In the case some uses
wouldn’t

If your view is that a legislative solution is needed, what
would be its main elements? Which activities of thebeneficiary
institutions should be covered and under which conditions?

[Open question]

See answer to question 29. Art. 5(2)(c) of the 2001/29/EC should
be made mandatory. As the 'Study on the application of directive
2001/29/EC on copyright and related rights in the information
society' (page 301) highlights […]to make an exception
mandatory could apply in the case of article 5(2) c), as the
development of digital libraries is one of the key objectives
of the Digital Agenda, and the digitization of culturalheritage
is promoted by the Council and the Commission […]. Art. 6 of the
2001/29/EC directive should be revised in order to enforce
exceptions and limitations and to ensure legitimate

If your view is that a different solution is needed, what would
itbe?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Off-premises access to library collections

Directive 2001/29/EC provides an exception for the consultation
of works and other subject-matter (consulting ane-book,
watching a documentary) via dedicated terminals on the premises
of such establishments for the purpose of research and private
study. The online consultation of works and other
subject-matter remotely (i.e. when the library user is not on
the premises of the library) requires authorisation and is
generally addressed in agreements between
universities/libraries and publishers. Some argue that the law
rather than agreements should provide for the possibility to,
and the conditions for, granting onlineaccess to collections.

(a)[In particular if you are an institutional user:]Have you
experienced specific problems when trying to negotiate
agreements with rights holders that enable you to provide
remote access, including across borders, to your collections
(or parts thereof) for purposes of research and private study?

(b)[In particular if you are an end user/consumer:]Have you
experienced specific problems when trying to consult, including
across borders, works and other subject-matter held in
thecollections of institutions such as universities and
national libraries when you are not on the premises of the
institutions in question?

(c)[In particular if you are aright holder:]Have you negotiated
agreements with institutional users that enable those
institutions to provide remote access, including across
borders, to the works or other subject-matter in their
collections, for purposes of research and private study?

[Open question]

Remote access to online collection of libraries covers a broad
spectrum going from digitised collection to digital-born
collection. Libraries are subject to complex and lengthy
negotiations with publishers, database vendors and right
holders, impacting collection development, duration of access,
permitted uses.. Librariesoften entrust negotiation and
management of contracts to national or regional institutional
consortia to increase their bargaining power. But the use of
consortia for the negotiations is a remedy, not an optimal
solution, and the logic of large numbers mayintroduce
rigidities in pricing and business models, encouraging the
purchase or subscription of large packages of content (big
deal) rather than the selection of targeted works. Currently
there are gaps to be filled in the Directives (e.g. in Infosoc
andDatabase directives) and even more in national copyright
laws. These gaps contribute to enforce unbalanced power
relations. Unbalanced power relations among right holders, and
between right holders and users do not contribute to establish
an environment of best practices for negotiation and contracts.
At present, licences are not satisfactory for the following
reasons: Technical accessibility and interoperability: Format
shifting and other adaptations should be permitted not only for
long-term preservationpurposes, but also for remote access when
needed to ensure technical accessibility and usability by print
impaired people, or to effectively integrate acquired or
licensed materials in Library information systems, according to
international standards of interoperability. But the copyright
holder or the database producer can refuse both to grant a
special licence, and, in case of born-digital content, to
temporarily remove the technological protection measures in
order to facilitate the use, and often theyrefuse. It should be
noted that TPMs protect not only content, but also metadata
related to those content, so that the legal protection of TPMs
affects also access and reuse of metadata for integration
within library catalogues and information discovery systems.
Inter-Library Loan and Document Supply: Cooperation between
cultural institutions for the benefit of the public is
explicitly encouraged by numerous international, national and
regional standards. Interlibrary Loan and Document Supply are
typical library services based on the temporary exchange of
documents between library “A” that holds the content and
library “B” that needs it. As an internal activity between
libraries, interlibrary exchange should be totally irrelevant
for the purposes of protection of copyright. In the digital
environment, such exchange requires transmission in a network
by an intermediary (eg. an internet provider and/or a service
provider). But there is uncertainty on these points: digital
reproductions made by libraries for inter-library exchange
purposes can or cannot be considered as *specific acts* of
reproduction covered by art. 5(2)c) of the InfoSoc Directive?
According to the InfoSoc Directive (art. 5(2)c) and art. 5(1)),
a digital reproduction made by the library "A" canor cannot be
sent electronically to the library "B", provided that copy will
be used by the library"B" for legitimate uses such as
replacement of damaged parts of a volume in its collection, or
to give to an end-user a print copy within the limits of
art.5(2)b), or communication by dedicated terminals within the
(very strict) limits of art. 5(3)n), or utilization for
administrative procedures within the limits of art. 5(3)(e)? An
interlibrary electronic exchange of protected works, or parts of
them, can or cannot be considered one of those "Temporary acts
of reproduction” referred to in Article 5(1), “which are
transient or incidental [and] an integral and essential part of
a technological process and whose sole purpose is to enable: (a)
a transmission ina network between third parties by an
intermediary, or (b) a lawful use of a work or other
subject-matter to be made, and which have no independent
economic significance”, and therefore “exempted from the
reproduction right provided for in Article 2"? There are
different interpretations on this matter, and in most Member
States there are no explicit exceptions for interlibrary
services. For online content subscribed to by libraries, the
interlibrary exchange is subject to licences, and only few
publishers allow such digital exchange. Remote access to
born-digital or digitized content (aka E-Lending): see answers
to Q36-38 Utilizations for distance learning courses and
programmes: most publishers do not allow the extraction and
reuse of reasonable portions ofprotected works acquired or
subscribed to by libraries or other cultural institutions and
their communication to registered users through e-Learning
platforms. It is generally accepted that the exception provided
by Art. 5(3)(a) of Directive 2001/29/EC covers both face-to-face
and distance education, and that the fundamental rights it
protects (freedom of expression, right to be informed, right to
learn) are of crucial importance. The enforcement of this
exception at European level, prohibiting its restriction by
national legislations, or by licences is of utmost importance.
Open access to research results: see answer to Q49. Content
mining: see answer to Q49 and 53. Post-termination access to
online subscribed content: recalling our answers to Q 28-30,
most licences do not provide any guarantee for access to
subscribed content after the termination of a licence. Such
content is considered just as a temporary service. Academic and
research libraries have negotiated licenses for decades (even
though the abovementioned problems have been rather consistent
over the years). Digital material until now has to a large
extent been focused on research and professional information
(mainly journals), reference and news, and not so much on books
and mainstream journals.Public libraries are a kind of newcomer
on this arena, due to the rapid development of e-books for
fiction and general/popular non-fiction. Public libraries
differ from academic and research libraries in that their user
base is the general public, i e anyone with a valid library
card. But, in contrast to the analog library services, access
to e-material is usually restricted to a specific geographic
area, for instance a municipality. This shows that although the
EU is encouraging cross-border cooperation,it seems not
applicable to online content hosted by libraries because of
territorial nature of copyright and/or the grant of
authorisation by rights holders.

If there are problems, how would they best be solved?

[Open question]

Licences of digitalcontent were expected to extend, not limit
opportunities for access and use through exceptions and
limitations to exclusive rights. On the contrary, exceptions
and limitations are often overridden by licences and TPMs, even
when licences are negotiated byLibrary consortia. There is a
need to ensure that contract/licences don´t override existing
exceptions and limitations to copyright.

If your view is that a legislative solution is needed, what
would be its main elements? Which activities of the beneficiary
institutions should be covered and under which conditions?

[Open question]

The reform, i.e. a legislative solution, should clarify that
every kind of utilization made by libraries and cultural
institutions for their public-interest mission are allowed,no
matter the medium of the transmission. Remote access should be
allowed for all the utilizations discussed above (see answers
to Q 32). Exceptions and limitations should apply to online
content as well as to analogue materials, and should be
mandatory and cannot be overridden by contracts or TPMs.
Exceptions and limitations should be flexible and updated to
new emerging needs, introducing a general free use provision
additional to the exceptions and limitations expressly
provided, as it has been suggested with art. 16 of the IFLA
Treaty Proposal (http://www.ifla.org/node/5858) and art. 5.5.
of the European Copyright Code drafted by the Wittem Group.
Such a general provision should allow application by analogy of
existing exceptions and limitations, provided they are
consistent with the concept of ‘fair practice’, and/or
compliant with the Three-Step-Test, which presently is recalled
by the Infosoc Directive just to limit the application of
Exceptions and Limitations. Moreover, contracts should not
overrideany statutory provisions regarding the entry of a work
into the public domain.

If your view is that a different solution is needed, what would
it be?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

E –lending

Traditionally, public libraries have loaned physical copies of
works (i.e. books, sometimes also CDs and DVDs) to their users.
Recent technological developments have made it technically
possible for libraries to provide users with temporary accessto
digital content, such as e-books, music or films via networks.
Under the current legal framework, libraries need to obtain the
authorisation of the rights holders to organise such e-lending
activities. In various Member States, publishers and
librariesare currently experimenting with different business
models for the making available of works online, including
direct supply of e-books to libraries by publishers or bundling
by aggregators.

(a)[In particular if you are alibrary:]Have you experienced
specific problems when trying to negotiate agreements to enable
the electronic lending (e-lending), including across borders, of
books or other materials held in your collection?

(b)[In particular if you are an end user/consumer:]Have you
experiencedspecific problems when trying to borrow books or
other materials electronically (e-lending), including across
borders, from institutions such as public libraries?

(c)[In particular if you are aright holder:]Have you negotiated
agreements with librariesto enable them to lend books or other
materials electronically, including across borders?

 YES – Please explain with specific examples

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO

 NO OPINION

If there are problems,how would they best be solved?

[Open question]

We would recommend to follow the EBLIDA principles on the
acquisition and access to e-books by libraries highlighting
among others the following needs: ● All e-book titles available
for sale to the public should be available to libraries for
acquisition and access; ● All e-books titles should be
available to libraries at the time of publication; ● Publishers
should deliver e-books in interoperable formats, or cooperate
with libraries in making interoperable formats; ● Libraries
should be permitted to make available acquired or licensed
e-books for a limited period of time to a user. ● It should be
possible to use the same e-book title simultaneously; ●
Authorised users should be able to download an e-book either in
the library or by way of remote access via authentication
systems. see:
http://www.eblida.org/Special%20Events/Key-principles-acquistion-eBooks-November2012/GB_English%20Version%20Key%20Principles.pdf
NB: as mentioned in the principles, a registereduser is a user
who has registered with the library and whose identity is known
to the library. Public lending right (PLR) and e-lending: An
adaptation of the PLR under the form of a Legal Licence
(including exception whenever necessary) could be a path
tofollow to ensure a fair remuneration to authors. See the
definition on the SOFIA website: “The legal licence regime, as
in the French system, is an alternative allowed for under
article 5 of Directive 92/100. Under this provision, the State
may waive the exclusive right provided for public lending,
provided at least the authors obtain remuneration in respect of
this lending, with each nation retaining the ability to set this
remuneration, taking due account of its cultural promotion
targets. This text alsoenables the State to exempt certain
categories of library from payment of the remuneration”.(
http://tinyurl.com/k276kto). The legal licence doesn’t have to
impact the selling price of the online content, but it shall
override any other remuneration claimsfor library lending. The
role of libraries in delivering free promotion of publishers
and authors in their mission should be clearly acknowledged.
This role is indeed supported by some authors such as
Fiktion.cc (http://fiktion.cc/about.php) The questionreferring
to interlibrary loan of digital content can be read in answer
to Q32.

The following two questions are relevant both to this point (n°
3) and the previous one (n° 2).

[In particular if you are an institutional user:]What
differences do yousee in the management of physical and online
collections, including providing access to your subscribers?
What problems have you encountered?

[Open question]

There is no possible comparison between physical and online
collection in libraries. Theoreticallydigital collection should
be based on the economy of abundance meaning access to an
infinity of content, where budget constraint could be the
“only” limit. But in reality, libraries can buy all
physical publications, but cannot buy licences to all
commercially available content because “the rights holders are
free to decide whether they want to giveaccess to a specific
work, and to decide on the terms for such access. The
consequence of this is that the collection building policy may
be decided by the publisher and not by the library “ (see
EBLIDA. European Libraries and the challenges of e-publishing.
May 2012,
http://www.eblida.org/news/european-libraries-and-the-challenges-of-e-publishing.html).
In addition to this core issue, publishers currently develop
models with a lot of frictions that are either mere copy/paste
of physical models or unaffordable models at high costs, or
yearly subscription packages where the libraries have no
influence on the selection of publications. None of the models
pay attention to libraries public missions and needs. Libraries
should have a “right to e-lend”, which will give the library
users a “right to e-read”. An exception allowing e-books and
e-journals to be purchased and loaned virtually through remote
downloads, mirroring library loans in the analogue world, is
therefore required. The format and technology must not be a
hindrance for access to books. Legal mechanisms and terms
should be equivalent for analog and digital lending.

[In particular if you are a right holder:]What difference do you
see between libraries’ traditional activities such as
on-premises consultation or public lending and activities such
as off-premises (online, at a distance) consultation and
e-lending? What problems have you encountered?

[Openquestion]

Libraries already offer a combination of on-premises
consultation of the physical collection + on-premises
consultation of certain digital collection, public lending and
remote access to (limited) online resources, etc... Differences
come from the opportunity offered by a 24/7 access to digital
collections that online services could deliver. With this
improvement of access, libraries could reach audiences that
until now have difficulties in coming on site during opening
times. This is an opportunity to enhance access to information
and deliver the Knowledge based society the European Union is
calling for. The last development in libraries usages showed
that the uses of the on-premises services of libraries and
other cultural institutions such as museums increased, as well
as the visitor rate. Meanwhile, the borrowing of physical items
decreased. The development of online services doesn’t contradict
the physical use of libraries and complement a range of services
in developing free access to information.

Mass digitisation

The term “mass digitisation” is normally used to refer to
efforts by institutions such as libraries and archives to
digitise (e.g. scan) the entire content or part of their
collections with an objective to preserve thesecollections and,
normally, to make them available to the public. Examples are
efforts by libraries to digitise novels form the early part of
the 20thcentury or whole collections of pictures of historical
value. This matter has been partly addressed at the EU level by
the 2011 Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) on key principles on
the digitisation and making available of out of commerce works
(i.e. works which are no longer found in the normal channels of
commerce), which is aiming to facilitate mass digitisation
efforts (for books and learned journals) on the basis of
licence agreements between libraries and similar cultural
institutions on the one hand and the collecting societies
representingauthors and publishers on the other44

You will find moreinformation about his MoU on the following
website:http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/copyright/out-of-commerce/index_en.htm.

. Provided the required funding is ensured (digitisation
projects are extremely expensive), the result of this MoU
should be that books that are currently to be found only in the
archives of, for instance, libraries will be digitised and made
available online to everyone. The MoU is based onvoluntary
licences (granted by Collective Management Organisations on the
basis of the mandates they receive from authors and publishers).
Some Member States may need to enact legislation to ensure the
largest possible effect of such licences (e.g. by establishing
in legislation a presumption of representation of a collecting
society or the recognition of an “extended effect” to the
licences granted)45

France and Germany have already adopted legislation to back the
effects of the MoU.The French act (LOIn° 2012-287 du 1er mars
2012 relative à l'exploitation numérique des livres
indisponibles du xxe siècle) foresees collective management,
unless the author or publisher in question opposes such
management.The German act (Gesetz zur Nutzung verwaister und
vergriffener Werke und einer weiteren Änderung des
Urheberrechtsgesetzes vom 1.Oktober 2013) contains a legal
presumption of representation by a collecting society in
relation to works whose rightholders are not members of the
collecting society.

.

[In particular if you are an institutional user,engaging or
wanting to engage in mass digitisation projects, a right
holder, a collective management organisation:]Would it be
necessary in your country to enact legislation to ensure that
the results of the 2011MoU (i.e. the agreements concluded
between libraries and collecting societies) have a cross-border
effect so that out of commerce works can be accessed across the
EU?

 YES – Please explain why and how it could best be achieved

The term Mass digitisation(as referred to in the Orphan Works
Directive) applies to publicly accessible libraries,
educational establishments and museums, as well as by archives,
film or audio heritage institutions and public-service
broadcasting organisations. The orphan works directive contains
a restrictive clause on diligent search that makes it impossible
to use. The MoU on Out of Commerce Works might have solved the
Orphan Works directive issue by addressing the issue from a
broader perspective. In addition to the fact that national laws
fail to fully address the needs of digital libraries, the MoU is
severely limited by its lack of concrete application across
Europe and the lack of implementation in National Law. It is
most probable that the question of cross-border access will be
better solved by enabling an exception for publicly funded
institution for making available content resulting of Mass
digitisation process by an extension of articles 5 (2)c and
5(3)n of the Infosoc directive. Actually in Norway, the mass
digitization carried out by the national library, is an
exception warranted in 5(2)c. And the making available through
a license (ECL) is in fact an extension of the Norwegian
implementation of 5(2)c” Solutions exist, such as Extended
Collective Licensing that mightbe useful when it comes to make
available content online for projects resulting from Mass
digitisation, as stated in the report available at :
http://www.ivir.nl/publicaties/guibault/ECL_Europeana_final_report092011.pdf.

 NO – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO OPINION

Would it be necessary to develop mechanisms, beyond those
already agreed for other types of content (e.g. for audio- or
audio-visual collections, broadcasters’ archives)?

 YES– Please explain

The mechanism should be based on an exception allowing for mass
digitization of out of print works. The mechanism should
regulate right clearance in line with the guidelines provided
for in the Out of Commerce MoU.

 NO – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO OPINION

Teaching

Directive 2001/29/EC46

Article 5(3)a of Directive 2001/29.

enables Member States to implement in their national legislation
limitations and exceptions for thepurpose of illustration for
non-commercial teaching. Such exceptions would typically allow
a teacher to use parts of or full works to illustrate his
course, e.g. by distributing copies of fragments of a book or
of newspaper articles in the classroom or byshowing protected
content on a smart board without having to obtain authorisation
from the right holders. The open formulation of this (optional)
provision allows for rather different implementation at Member
States level. The implementation of the exception differs from
Member State to Member State, with several Member States
providing instead a framework for the licensing of content for
certain educational uses. Some argue that the law should
provide for better possibilities for distance learning and
study at home.

(a)[In particular if you are an end user/consumer or an
institutional user:]Have you experienced specific problems when
trying to use works or other subject-matter for illustration for
teaching, including across borders?

(b)[In particularif you are a right holder:]Have you experienced
specific problems resulting from the way in which works or other
subject-matter are used for illustration for teaching, including
across borders?

 YES – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO

 NO OPINION

If there are problems, how would they best be solved?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

What mechanisms exist in the market place tofacilitate the use
of content for illustration for teaching purposes? How
successful are they?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

If your view is that a legislative solution is needed, what
wouldbe its main elements? Which activities of the beneficiary
institutions should be covered and under what conditions?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

If your view is that a different solution isneeded, what would
it be?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Research

Directive 2001/29/EC47

Article 5(3)a of Directive 2001/29.

enables Member States to choose whether to implement in their
national laws a limitation for the purpose of non-commercial
scientific research. The open formulation of this (optional)
provision allows for rather different implementations at Member
States level.

(a)[In particular if you are an end user/consumer or an
institutional user:]Have you experienced specific problems when
trying to use works or other subject matter in the context of
research projects/activities, including across borders?

(b)[In particular if you are a right holder:]Have you
experiencedspecific problems resulting from the way in which
works or other subject-matter are used in the context of
research projects/activities, including across borders?

 YES – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO

 NO OPINION

If there are problems, how would they best be solved?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

What mechanisms exist in the Member States to facilitate the use
of content forresearch purposes? How successful are they?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Disabilities

Directive 2001/29/EC48

Article 5 (3)b of Directive 2001/29.

provides for an exception/limitation for thebenefit of people
with a disability. The open formulation of this (optional)
provision allows for rather different implementations at Member
States level. At EU and international level projects have been
launched to increase the accessibility of works andother
subject-matter for persons with disabilities (notably by
increasing the number of works published in special formats and
facilitating their distribution across the European Union)49

The European Trusted Intermediaries Network (ETIN) resulting
froma Memorandum of Understanding between representatives of
the right-holder community (publishers, authors, collecting
societies) and interested parties such as associations for
blind and dyslexic persons
(http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/copyright/initiatives/access/index_en.htm)
and the Trusted Intermediary Global Accessible Resources (TIGAR)
project in WIPO (http://www.visionip.org/portal/en/).

.

The Marrakesh Treaty50

Marrakesh Treaty to Facilitate Access to Published Works by
Visually Impaired Persons and Persons with Print Disabilities,
Marrakesh, June 17 to 28 2013.

has been adopted to facilitate access to published works for
persons who are blind, visually impaired, or otherwise print
disabled. The Treaty creates a mandatory exception to copyright
that allows organisations for the blind to produce, distribute
and make available accessible format copies to visually
impaired persons without the authorisation of the rightholders.
The EU and its Member States have started work to sign and
ratify the Treaty. This may require the adoption of certain
provisions at EU level (e.g. to ensure the possibility to
exchange accessible format copies across borders).

(a)[In particular if you are a person with a disability or an
organisation representing persons with disabilities:]Have you
experienced problems with accessibility to content, including
across borders, arising from Member States’ implementation of
this exception?

(b)[In particular if you are an organisation providing services
for persons with disabilities:]Have you experienced problems
when distributing/communicating works published in special
formats across the EU?

(c)[In particular if you are a right holder:]Have you
experienced specific problems resulting from the application of
limitations or exceptions allowing for the
distribution/communication of works published in special
formats, including across borders?

 YES – Please explain by giving examples

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO

 NO OPINION

If there are problems, what could be done to
improveaccessibility?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

What mechanisms exist in the market place to facilitate
accessibility to content? How successful are they?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Text and data mining

Text and data mining/content mining/data analytics51

For the purpose of the present document, the term “text and data
mining” will be used.

are different terms used to describe increasingly important
techniques used in particular by researchers for the
exploration of vast amounts of existing texts and data (e.g.,
journals, web sites, databases etc.). Through the use of
software or other automated processes, ananalysis is made of
relevant texts and data in order to obtain new insights,
patterns and trends.

The texts and data used for mining are either freely accessible
on the internet or accessible through subscriptions to e.g.
journals and periodicals that give access to the databases of
publishers. A copy is made of the relevant texts and data (e.g.
on browser cache memories or in computers RAM memories or onto
the hard disk of a computer), prior to the actual analysis.
Normally, it is considered that to mine protected works or
other subject matter, it is necessary to obtain authorisation
from the right holders for the making of such copies unless
such authorisation can be implied (e.g. content accessible to
general public without restrictions on the internet, open
access).

Some argue that the copies required for text and data mining are
covered by the exception for temporary copies in Article 5.1 of
Directive 2001/29/EC. Others consider that text and data mining
activities should not even be seen as coveredby copyright. None
of this is clear, in particular since text and data mining does
not consist only of a single method, but can be undertaken in
several different ways. Important questions also remain as to
whether the main problems arising in relation tothis issue go
beyond copyright (i.e. beyond the necessity or not to obtain
the authorisation to use content) and relate rather to the need
to obtain “access” to content (i.e. being able to use e.g.
commercial databases).

A specific Working Group was set up on this issue in the
framework of the "Licences for Europe" stakeholder dialogue. No
consensus was reached among participating stakeholders on either
the problems to be addressed or the results. At the same time,
practical solutions to facilitate text and data mining of
subscription-based scientific content were presented by
publishers as an outcome of “Licences for Europe”52

See the document “Licences for Europe – ten pledges to bring
more content
online”:http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/copyright/docs/licences-for-europe/131113_ten-pledges_en.pdf.

. In the context of these discussions, other stakeholders argued
that no additional licences should be required to mine material
to which access has been provided through a subscription
agreement and considered that a specific exception for text and
data mining should be introduced, possibly on the basis of
a distinction between commercial andnon-commercial.

(a)[In particular if you are an end user/consumer or an
institutional user:]Have you experienced obstacles, linked to
copyright, when trying to use text or data mining methods,
including across borders?

(b)[In particular if you are aservice provider:]Have you
experienced obstacles, linked to copyright, when providing
services based on text or data mining methods, including across
borders?

(c)[In particular if you are a right holder:]Have you
experienced specific problems resultingfrom the use of text and
data mining in relation to copyright protected content,
including across borders?

 YES – Please explain

The potential of text and data mining for scientific research is
enormous, and has been widely demonstrated (See JISC (2012),The
value and benefits of text mining,
http://www.jisc.ac.uk/media/documents/publications/reports/2012/value-text-mining.pdf),
see also key resources below. It is a process aimed to collect
raw data (e.g., the occurrence of words, figures etc. in a
database), not creative expressions. Undertaking text and data
mining of content to which researchers have already lawful
access should be considered a legitimate utilization, and
should not be subject to re-license. But there is not legal
certainty on this point, and most standard licences do not
allow content mining. As a consequence, in most cases
researchers give up research, rather than addressing high
transaction cost, both direct (cost of re-licensing) and
indirect (the time needed to negotiate). For this,an exception
should explicitly legitimate text and data mining on content on
which researchers have lawful access. Since in most cases it is
necessary to make a copy of the content in order for a machine
to extract facts and data for mining, the act of text and data
mining is precluded under copyright law in Europe. Because it
prevents the copying of large portions of databases, the
Database Directive is also a legal barrier to text and data
mining. Technical protection measures (also protected under
law),preventing the downloading of large amounts of content,
are also preventing the application of text and data mining
techniques. Although text and data mining is concerned with the
extraction of facts and data, the results of text and data
mining researchare currently being suppressed because of a lack
of legal clarity. Even if content is openly available on the
Web, without explicit permission indicating otherwise, it is
unclear if the copying of this content for the purpose of text
and data mining is legal. Content licensed under open access
licences such as cc-by-sa or cc-by-nc may be inadvertently
preventing users from mining the content. • Text and data
mining is concerned with the extraction of facts and data ,
which are not covered by copyright • Text and data mining may
infringe copyright because it is necessary to make copies of
content to convert it into machine readableformat • Technical
protection measures (TPMs) prevent users from downloading
content to mine Key resources : • McKinsey Global Institute.
(2011, June). Big Data: The Next Frontier for Innovation,
Competition, and Productivity. Available at,
http://www.mckinsey.com/insights/business_technology/big_data_the_next_frontier_for_innovation.
This McKinsey report estimates that government expenditure in
Europe could be reduced by €100 billion a year through
effective use of ‘big data’ • Jisc – Value and Benefits of Text
Mining – March 2012,
http://www.jisc.ac.uk/reports/value-and-benefits-of-text-mining
• LIBER factsheet on text and data mining,
http://www.libereurope.eu/sites/default/files/Text%20and%20Data%20Mining%20Factsheet.pdf

 NO – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO OPINION

If there are problems, how would they best besolved?

[Open question]

For this, an exception should explicitly legitimate text and
data mining on content on which researchers have lawful access.
Researchers must be able to share the results of text and data
mining, as long as these results are not substitutable for the
original copyright work - irrespective of copyright law,
database law or contractual terms to the contrary. A specific
exception to this effect allowing the copying of content for
the purpose of text and data mining is necessary. Such an
exception should not distinguish between commercial and
non-commercial purposes as, for research institutions, this
would prevent knowledge transfer. • An exception for text and
data mining would provide legal certainty; • TPMs and contracts
should not override such an exception; • Differentiating between
commercial and non-commercial activity is not in the public
interest.

If your view is that a legislative solution is needed, what
would be its main elements? Which activities should be covered
andunder what conditions?

[Open question]

A legislative solution should take the form of an exception
which allows the copying of content and the circumvention of
TPMs for

If your view is that a different solution is needed, what would
it be?

[Openquestion]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Are there other issues, unrelated to copyright, that constitute
barriers to the use of text or data mining methods?

[Open question] ……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

User-generated content

Technological and service developments mean that citizens can
copy, use and distribute content at little to no financial
cost. As a consequence, new types of online activities are
developing rapidly, including the making of so-called
“user-generated content”. While users can create totally
original content, they can also take one or several
pre-existing works, change something in the work(s), and upload
the result on the Internet e.g. to platforms and blogs53

A typical example could be the “kitchen” or “wedding” video
(adding one's own video to a pre-existing sound recording), or
adding one's own text to a pre-existing photograph. Other
examples are “mash-ups” (blending two sound recordings),
andreproducing parts of journalistic work (report, review etc.)
in a blog.

. User-generated content (UGC) can thus cover the modification
of pre-existing works even if the newly-generated/"uploaded"
work does not necessarily require a creative effort and results
from merely adding, subtracting or associating some pre-existing
content with other pre-existing content. This kind of activity
is not “new” as such. However, the development of social
networking and social media sites that enable users to share
content widely has vastly changed the scale of such activities
and increased the potential economic impact for those holding
rights in the pre-existing works. Re-use is no longer the
preserve of a technically and artistically adept elite. With
the possibilitiesoffered by the new technologies, re-use is
open to all, at no cost. This in turn raises questions with
regard to fundamental rights such the freedom of expression and
the right to property.

A specific Working Group was set up on this issue in the
frameworkof the "Licences for Europe" stakeholder dialogue. No
consensus was reached among participating stakeholders on
either the problems to be addressed or the results or even the
definition of UGC. Nevertheless, a wide range of views were
presented as to thebest way to respond to this phenomenon. One
view was to say that a new exception is needed to cover UGC, in
particular non-commercial activities by individuals such as
combining existing musical works with videos, sequences of
photos, etc. Another view wasthat no legislative change is
needed: UGC is flourishing, and licensing schemes are
increasingly available (licence schemes concluded between
rightholders and platforms as well as micro-licences concluded
between rightholders and the users generating thecontent. In
any event, practical solutions to ease user-generated content
and facilitate micro-licensing for small users were pledged by
rightholders across different sectors as a result of the
“Licences for Europe” discussions54

See the document “Licences for Europe – ten pledges to bring
more content
online”:http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/copyright/docs/licences-for-europe/131113_ten-pledges_en.pdf.

.

(a)[In particular if you are an end user/consumer:]Have you
experienced problems when trying to use pre-existing works or
other subject matter to disseminate new content on the
Internet, including across borders?

(b)[In particular if you are a service provider:]Have you
experienced problems when users publish/disseminate new content
based on the pre-existing works or other subject-matter through
your service, including across borders?

(c)[In particular if you are a right holder:]Haveyou experienced
problems resulting from the way the users are using pre-existing
works or other subject-matter to disseminate new content on the
Internet, including across borders?

 YES – Please explain by giving examples

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO

 NO OPINION

(a)[In particular if you are an end user/consumer or a right
holder:]Have you experienced problems when trying to ensure
that the work you have created (on the basis of pre-existing
works) is properly identified for online use? Are proprietary
systems sufficient in this context?

(b)[In particular if you are a service provider:]Do you provide
possibilities for users that are publishing/disseminating the
worksthey have created (on the basis of pre-existing works)
through your service to properly identify these works for
online use?

 YES – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO OPINION

(a)[In particular if you are an end user/consumer or a right
holder):]Have you experienced problems when trying to be
remunerated for the use of the work you have created (on the
basis of pre-existing works)?

(b)[In particular if you are a service provider:]Do you provide
remuneration schemes for users publishing/disseminating the
works they have created (on the basis of pre-existing works)
through your service?

 YES –Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO OPINION

If there are problems, how would they best be solved?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

If your view is that a legislative solution is needed, what
would be its main elements? Which activities should be covered
and under what conditions?

[Openquestion]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

If your view is that a different solution is needed, what would
it be?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Private copying and reprography

Directive 2001/29/EC enables Member States to implement in their
national legislation exceptions or limitations to the
reproduction right for copies made for private use and
photocopying55

Article 5. 2)(a) and (b) ofDirective 2001/29.

. Levies are charges imposed at national level on goods
typically used for such purposes (blank media, recording
equipment, photocopying machines, mobile listening devices such
as mp3/mp4 players, computers, etc.) with a view to compensating
rightholders for the harm they suffer when copies are made
without their authorisation by certain categories of persons
(i.e. natural persons making copies for their private use) or
through use of certain technique (i.e. reprography). In that
context,levies are important for rightholders.

With the constant developments in digital technology, the
question arises as to whether the copying of files by
consumers/end-users who have purchased content online - e.g.
when a person has bought an MP3 file and goes on to store
multiple copies of that file (in her computer, her tablet and
her mobile phone) - also triggers, or should trigger, the
application of private copying levies. It is argued that, in
some cases, these levies may indeed be claimed by rightholders
whether or not the licence fee paid by the service provider
already covers copies made by the end user. This approach could
potentially lead to instances of double payments whereby levies
could be claimed on top of service providers’ licence fees56

Communication "Unleashing the Potential of Cloud Computing in
Europe", COM(2012) 529 final.

57

These issues were addressed in the recommendations of Mr António
Vitorino resulting from the mediation on private copying and
reprography levies. You can consult these recommendations on
the following
website:http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/copyright/docs/levy_reform/130131_levies-vitorino-recommendations_en.pdf.

.

There is also an on-going discussion as to the application or
not of levies to certain types of cloud-based services such as
personal lockers or personal video recorders.

In your view, is there a need to clarify at the EU levelthe
scope and application of the private copying and reprography
exceptions58

Art. 5.2(a) and 5.2(b) of Directive 2001/29/EC.

in the digital environment?

 YES – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO OPINION

Should digital copies made by end users for private purposes in
the context of a service that has been licensed by
rightholders, and where the harm to the rightholder is minimal,
be subject to private copying levies?59

This issue was also addressed in the recommendations of Mr
Antonio Vitorino resulting from the mediation on private
copying and reprography levies

 YES – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO – Please explain

When content has been already licensed, users should not be
subject to payment for uses that are compliant with the
licence’s terms. Registered Users of Library collections are
benefitting of the existence of the exception for private
copying. This exception should cover all kinds of protected
works.

 NO OPINION

How would changes in levies with respect to the application to
online services (e.g. services based oncloud computing
allowing, for instance, users to have copies on different
devices) impact the development and functioning of new business
models on the one hand and rightholders’ revenue on the other?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Would you see an added value in making levies visible on the
invoices for products subject to levies?60

This issue was also addressed in the recommendations of Mr
Antonio Vitorino resulting from the mediation on private
copying and reprography levies.

 YES – Please explain

It is necessary for transparency and the user’s right to be
informed.

 NO – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO OPINION

Divergingnational systems levy different products and apply
different tariffs. This results in obstacles to the free
circulation of goods and services in the Single Market. At the
same time, many Member States continue to allow the
indiscriminate application of private copying levies to all
transactions irrespective of the person to whom the product
subject to a levy is sold (e.g. private person or business). In
that context, not all Member States have ex ante exemption
and/or ex post reimbursement schemes which could remedy these
situations and reduce the number of undue payments61

This issue was also addressed in the recommendations of Mr
Antonio Vitorino resulting from the mediation on private
copying and reprography levies.

.

Have you experienced a situation where a cross-border
transaction resulted in undue levy payments, or duplicate
payments of the same levy, or other obstacles to the free
movement of goods or services?

 YES – Please specify the type of transaction and indicate
the percentage of the unduepayments. Please also indicate how a
priori exemption and/or ex post reimbursement schemes could help
to remedy the situation.

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO OPINION

What percentage of products subject to a levy is sold to persons
other than natural persons for purposes clearly unrelated to
private copying? Do any of those transactions result in undue
payments?Please explain in detail the example you provide (type
of products, type of transaction, stakeholders, etc.).

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Where such undue payments arise, what percentage of trade do
they affect? To what extent could a priori exemptions and/or ex
post reimbursement schemes existing in some Member States help
to remedy the situation?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

If you have identified specific problems with the current
functioning of the levy system, how would these problems best
be solved?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Fair remuneration of authors andperformers

The EU copyright acquis recognises for authors and performers a
number of exclusive rights and, in the case of performers whose
performances are fixed in phonograms, remuneration rights. There
are few provisions in the EU copyright law governing
thetransferof rights from authors or performers to producers62

See e.g. Directive 92/100/EEC, Art.2(4)-(7).

or determining who the owner of the rights is when the work or
other subject matter is created in the context of an employment
contract63

Seee.g. Art. 2.3. of Directive 2009/24/EC, Art. 4 of Directive
96/9/EC.

. This is an area that has been traditionally left for Member
States to regulate and there are significant differences in
regulatory approaches. Substantial differences also exist
betweendifferent sectors of the creative industries.

Concerns continue to be raised that authors and performers are
not adequately remunerated, in particular but not solely, as
regards online exploitation. Many consider that the economic
benefit of new forms ofexploitation is not being fairly shared
along the whole value chain. Another commonly raised issue
concerns contractual practices, negotiation mechanisms,
presumptions of transfer of rights, buy-out clauses and the
lack of possibility to terminate contracts. Some stakeholders
are of the opinion that rules at national level do not suffice
to improve their situation and that action at EU level is
necessary.

[In particular if you are an author/performer:] What is the best
mechanism (or combination ofmechanisms) to ensure that you
receive an adequate remuneration for the exploitation of your
works and performances?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Is there a need to act at the EU level (forinstance to prohibit
certain clauses in contracts)?

 YES – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO – Please explain why

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO OPINION

If you consider that the current rules are not effective, what
would you suggest to address the shortcomings you identify?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Respect for rights

Directive 2004/48/EE64

Directive 2004/48/EC of the European Parliament and of the
Council of 29 April 2004 on the enforcement of intellectual
property rights.

provides for a harmonised framework for the civil enforcement of
intellectual property rights, including copyright and related
rights. The Commission has consulted broadly on this text65

You will find more information on the following
website:http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/iprenforcement/directive/index_en.htm

. Concerns have been raised as to whether some of its provisions
are still fit to ensure a proper respect for copyright in the
digital age. On the one hand, the current measures seem to be
insufficient to deal with the new challenges brought by the
dissemination of digital content on the internet; on the other
hand, there are concerns about the current balance between
enforcement of copyright and the protection of fundamental
rights, in particular the right for a private life and data
protection. While it cannot be contested that enforcement
measures should always be available in case of infringement of
copyright, measures could be proposed to strengthen respect for
copyright when the infringed content is used for a commercial
purpose66

For example when the infringing content is offered on a website
which gets advertising revenues that depend on the volume of
traffic.

. One means to do this could be to clarify the role of
intermediaries in the IP infrastructure67

This clarification should not affect the liability regime of
intermediary service providers established by Directive
2000/31/EC on electronic commerce, which will remain unchanged.

. At the same time, there could be clarification of the
safeguards for respect of private life and data protection for
private users.

Should the civil enforcement system in the EU be rendered more
efficient for infringements of copyright committed with a
commercial purpose?

 YES – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO OPINION

In particular, is the current legal framework clear enough to
allow for sufficientinvolvement of intermediaries (such as
Internet service providers, advertising brokers, payment
service providers, domain name registrars, etc.) in inhibiting
online copyright infringements with a commercial purpose? If
not, what measures would be useful to foster the cooperation of
intermediaries?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Does the current civil enforcement framework ensure that the
right balance is achieved between the right to have
one’scopyright respected and other rights such as the
protection of private life and protection of personal data?

 YES – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO OPINION

A single EU Copyright Title

The idea of establishing a unified EU Copyright Title has been
present in the copyright debate for quite some time now,
although views as to the merits and the feasibility of such an
objective are divided. A unified EU Copyright Title would
totally harmonise the area of copyright law in the EU and
replace national laws. There would then be a single EU title
instead of a bundle of national rights. Some see this as the
only manner in which a truly Single Market for content
protected by copyright can be ensured, while others believe
that the same objective can better be achieved by establishing
a higher level of harmonisation while allowing for acertain
degree of flexibility and specificity in Member States’ legal
systems.

Should the EU pursue the establishment of a single EU Copyright
Title, as a means of establishing a consistent framework for
rights and exceptions to copyright across the EU,as well as a
single framework for enforcement?

 YES

 NO

 NO OPINION

Should this be the next step in the development of copyright in
the EU? Does the current level of difference among the Member
State legislation mean that this is a longer termproject?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Other issues

The above questionnaire aims to provide a comprehensive
consultation on the most important matters relating to the
current EU legal frameworkfor copyright. Should any important
matters have been omitted, we would appreciate if you could
bring them to our attention, so they can be properly addressed
in the future.

Are there any other important matters related to the EU legal
framework for copyright? Please explain and indicate how such
matters should be addressed.

[Open question]

Copyright law reform at the European level is absolutely
necessary to simplify the current complicated regime and the
overlapping of different directives. Licensing initiatives
alone will not achieve this. Meanwhile, the EU should develop
mechanisms to ensure that licence clauses cannot override
existing exceptions and limitations. During the previous
Licences for Europe dialogue, it has never been made possible
to discuss this issue, hence the need of urgent decision on
that point. For the same reason, the removal of technological
protection measures should be made compulsory for all
legitimate uses. Compulsory Licenses for Libraries The
exclusive rights that exist in regards to published works
should not include the right of refusal to sell to libraries,
or to limit their services, both in physical and digital
environment. Commercial licences for libraries should include
the utilizations presently permitted by Infosoc and Database
Directives. In all cases, the use of the acquired materials
should be allowed for the following purposes: a. Research. The
Library, its parent Institution’s staff and affiliates together
with its Authorized Users should, from a place and at a time
individually chosen by them, be able to search, retrieve, and
display the licensed materials, print or download and save
individual chapters, articles or items of the licensed
materials without legal or technological impediment. Moreover,
they should be able to use data and text mining technologies to
derive information from the licensed materials for computational
analysis and other research purposes. b. Education and Teaching.
The Library and its Authorized Users should be able to extract
or use information contained in licensed materials for
educational, scientific, or research purposes, including
extraction and manipulation of information or images for the
purpose of illustration, explanation, comment, criticism,
teaching, research, or analysis. TheLibrary and/or its parent
Institution’s staff and affiliates should be able to use a
reasonable portion of licensed materials in the course of
instruction and communicate same material to Authorized Users
at a place and time convenient to them. c. Scholarly Sharing.
Authorized Users should be able to transmit to a third party
colleague in hard copy or electronically, insubstantial amounts
of the licensed materials for personal, scholarly, educational,
scientific, or research uses. Authorized Users should beable to
use, with appropriate credit, figures, tables and brief excerpts
from the Licensed Materials in the Authorized User’s own
scientific, scholarly and educational works. When an Authorized
User is the Author of an article which is part of the licensed
materials, and which is the result of a publicly funded
research, he/she or the Library staff should be able to put
such work, with appropriate credit to the Publisher, in an Open
Access repository after a reasonable time from the date of its
publication. d. Interlibrary Loan. Licensee’s staff should be
able to provide to other libraries or cultural institutions
whether by post or fax, or secure electronic transmission,
whereby the electronic file is deleted immediately after
printing, for the purposes ofresearch or private study and not
for Commercial Use, a singlecopy of articles, chapters, or
other individual documents from licensed materials. e.
Technical Accessibility, usability and interoperability. Format
shifting and other adaptations should be permitted for long-term
preservation purposes, or to ensure technical accessibility and
usability by visually impaired Authorized users, or to
effectively integrate Licensed Materials in Library information
systems, according to international standards of
interoperability. Within the limits of these purposes, the
Licensor should agree to temporarily remove the technical
barriers that may prevent adaptations. f. Administrative and
Judicial Proceedings. The Library, its parent Institution’s
staff, affiliates and authorized users should be able to
transmit and/or upload individual articles to secure electronic
systems for judicial and administrative use, including any
national research quality assessment (such as RAE in UK or VQR
in Italy) and the selection procedures for academic and
professional careers. g. Archival Availability. The Library
should be granted a nonexclusive, royalty-free, perpetual right
to use any licensed materials accessed during the License term.
The Licensor should permit the Library to archive one complete
copy of the Licensed Materials, and permit use of the archived
materials in the event that access is discontinued or
suspended. Such use should be in accordance with the provisions
of the agreement, which provisions shall survive any termination
of it, provided that the contractual terms of the License
agreement will not override any statutory provisions regarding
the entry of the work into the public domain. This means that
the archival copy should be free after the termination of
copyright terms, when it enters in the public domain. It should
be prevented the revival of exclusive "sui generis" rights..
Once a work is out-of-commerce in its all versions, Library
should be entitled to give unrestricted access to licensed
materials. We would like to quote some excerpts of the report
of Hugenholtz, B., & Senftleben, M. R. F. (2011, November).
Fair Use in Europe. In Search of Flexibilities. IViR.
Amsterdam, Netherlands. Available at,
http://www.ivir.nl/publications/hugenholtz/Fair%20Use%20Report%20PUB.pdf.
o Page 10: “The current lack of flexibility in copyright law
undermines the very fundamental freedoms, societal interests
and economic goals that copyright law traditionally aims to
protect and advance. This is the case particularly in the area
of limitations and exceptions – an area where more than
elsewhere in the law of copyright rules have become detailed,
rigid and connected to specific states of technology. Examples
abound. Whereas social media have in recent times become an
essential means of social and cultural communication, current
copyright law leaves little or no room for sharing
‘user-generated content’ that builds upon pre-existing works.
By the same token, current limitations and exceptions rarely
take into consideration currenteducational and scholarly
practices, such as the use of copyright protected content in
Powerpoint presentations, in ‘digital classrooms’, on
university websites or in scholarly e-mail correspondence.
Existing limitations and exceptions in many Member States’
copyright laws also find it hard to accommodate such essential
information tools as search engines. By impeding these and
other uses that should arguably remain outside the reach of
copyright protection, the law’s overly rigorous structure
impedes not only cultural, social and economic progress, but
also undermines the social legitimacy of copyright law proper.”
o Page 17: “The EU acquis, in other words, contains
flexibilities that may be invisible at the national level
because of an overly cautious andrestrictive implementation.”

