


Public Consultation

on the review of the EU copyright rules

Contents

I.  Introduction  2

A.  Context ofthe consultation  2

B.  How to submit replies to this questionnaire  3

C.  Confidentiality  3

II.  Rights and the functioning of the Single Market  7

A.  Why is it not possible to access many online content
services from anywhere in Europe?  7

B.  Is there a need for more clarity as regards the scope of
what needs to be authorised (or not) in digital transmissions?
10

1.  The act of “making available”  10

2.  Two rights involved in a single act of exploitation  11

3.  Linking and browsing  12

4.  Download to own digital content  13

C.  Registration of works and other subject matter – is it a
good idea?  14

D.  How to improve the use and interoperability ofidentifiers
15

E.  Term of protection – is it appropriate?  15

III.  Limitations and exceptions in the Single Market  16

A.  Access to content in libraries andarchives  19

1.  Preservation and archiving  19

2.  Off-premises access to library collections  20

3.  E – lending  21

4.  Massdigitisation  22

B.  Teaching  23

C.  Research  25

D.  Disabilities  25

E.  Text and data mining  27

F.  User-generated content  28

IV.  Private copying and reprography  31

V.  Fair remuneration of authors and performers  33

VI.  Respect for rights  34

VII.  A single EU Copyright Title  36

VIII.  Other issues  36

Introduction

Context of the consultation

Over the last two decades, digital technology and the Internet
have reshaped the ways in which content iscreated, distributed,
and accessed. New opportunities have materialised for those that
create and produce content (e.g. a film, a novel, a song), for
new and existing distribution platforms, for institutions such
as libraries, for activities such as research and for citizens
who now expect to be able to access content – for information,
education or entertainment purposes – regardless of
geographical borders.

This new environment also presents challenges. One of them is
for the market to continue to adaptto new forms of distribution
and use. Another one is for the legislator to ensure that the
system of rights, limitations to rights and enforcement remains
appropriate and is adapted to the new environment. This
consultation focuses on the second of these challenges:
ensuring that the EU copyright regulatory framework stays fit
for purpose in the digital environment to support creation and
innovation, tap the full potential of the Single Market, foster
growth and investment in our economy and promote cultural
diversity.

In its "Communication on Content in the Digital Single Market"1

COM (2012)789 final, 18/12/2012.

the Commission set out two parallel tracks of action:on the one
hand, to complete its on-going effort to review and to
modernise the EU copyright legislative framework2

As announced in the Intellectual Property Strategy ' A single
market for Intellectual Property Rights: COM (2011)287 final,
24/05/2011.

3

"Based on market studies and impact assessment and legal
drafting work"as announced in the Communication (2012)789.

with a view to a decision in 2014 on whether to table
legislative reform proposals, andon the other, to facilitate
practical industry-led solutions through the stakeholder
dialogue "Licences for Europe" on issues on which rapidprogress
was deemed necessary and possible.

The "Licences for Europe" process has been finalised now4

See the document “Licences for Europe – tem pledges to bring
more content
online”:http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/copyright/docs/licences-for-europe/131113_ten-pledges_en.pdf.

. The Commission welcomes the practical solutions stakeholders
have put forward in this context and will monitor their
progress. Pledges have been made by stakeholders in all four
Working Groups (cross border portability of services,
user-generated content, audiovisual and film heritage and text
and data mining). Taken together, the Commission expects these
pledges to be a further step in making the user environment
easier in many different situations. The Commission also takes
note of the fact that two groups – user-generated content and
text and datamining – did not reach consensus among
participating stakeholders on either the problems to be
addressed or on the results. The discussions and results of
"Licences for Europe" will be also taken into account in the
context of the review of the legislative framework.

As part of the review process, the Commission is now launching a
public consultation on issues identified in the Communication on
Content in the Digital Single Market, i.e.:"territoriality in
the Internal Market, harmonisation, limitations and exceptions
to copyright in the digital age; fragmentation of the EU
copyright market; and how to improve the effectiveness and
efficiency of enforcement while underpinning its legitimacy in
the wider context of copyright reform". As highlighted in the
October 2013 European CouncilConclusions5

EUCO 169/13, 24/25 October 2013.

"Providing digital services and content across the single market
requires the establishment of a copyright regime for the digital
age. The Commission will therefore complete its on-going review
of the EU copyright framework in spring 2014. It is important
to modernise Europe's copyright regime and facilitate
licensing, while ensuring a high level protection of
intellectual property rights and taking into account cultural
diversity".

This consultation builds on previous consultations and public
hearings, in particular those on the "Green Paper on copyright
in the knowledge economy"6

COM(2008)
466/3,http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/copyright/copyright-infso/index_en.htm#maincontentSec2.

, the "Green Paper on the online distribution of audiovisual
works"7

COM(2011) 427
final,http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/consultations/2011/audiovisual_en.htm.

and "Content Online"8

http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/consultations/2009/content_online_en.htm.

. These consultations provided valuable feedback from
stakeholders on a number of questions, on issues as diverse as
the territoriality of copyright and possible ways to overcome
territoriality, exceptions related to the online dissemination
of knowledge, and rightholders’ remuneration, particularly in
the audiovisual sector. Views were expressed by stakeholders
representing all stages in the value chain, including right
holders, distributors, consumers, and academics. The questions
elicited widely diverging views on the best way to proceed. The
"Green Paper on Copyright in the Knowledge Economy" was followed
up by a Communication. The replies to the "Green Paper on the
online distribution of audiovisual works" have fed into
subsequent discussions on the Collective Rights Management
Directive and into the current review process.

How to submit replies to this questionnaire

You are kindly asked to send your repliesby 5 February 2014as a
word or pdf document to the following e-mail address of DG
Internal Market and
Services:markt-copyright-consultation@ec.europa.eu. Please note
that replies sent after that date will not be taken into
account.

This consultation is addressed to different categories of
stakeholders. To the extent possible, the questions indicate
the category/ies of respondents most likely to be concerned by
them (annotation in brackets, before the actual question).
Respondents should nevertheless feel free to reply to any/all
of the questions. Also, please note that, apart from the
question concerning the identification of the respondent, none
of the questions is obligatory. Replies containing answers only
to part of the questions will be also accepted.

You are requested to provide your answers directly within this
consultation document. For the “Yes/No/No opinion” questions
please put the selected answer inboldandunderlineit so it is
easy for us to see your selection.

In your answers to the questions, you are invited to refer to
the situation in EU Member States.You are also invited in
particular to indicate, where relevant, what would be the
impact of options you put forward in terms of costs,
opportunitiesand revenues.

The public consultation is available in English. Responses may,
however, be sent in any of the 24 official languages of the EU.

Confidentiality

The contributions received in this round of consultation as well
as a summary report presenting the responses in a statistical
and aggregated form will be published on the website of DG
MARKT.

Please note that all contributions received will be published
together with the identity of the contributor, unless the
contributor objects to the publication of their personal data
on the grounds that such publication would harm his or her
legitimate interests. In this case, the contribution will be
published in anonymous form upon the contributor's explicit
request. Otherwise the contribution will not be published nor
will its content be reflected in the summary report.

Pleaseread ourPrivacy statement.

Please identify yourself:

Name:

In the interests of transparency, organisations (including, for
example, NGOs, trade associations and commercial enterprises)
are invited to provide the public with relevant information
about themselves by registering in the InterestRepresentative
Register and subscribing to its Code of Conduct.

If you are a Registered organisation, please indicate your
Register ID number below. Your contribution will then be
considered as representing the views of your organisation.

…………………………………………………………………………………………………..

…………………………………………………………………………………………………..

If your organisation is not registered, you have the opportunity
toregister now. Responses from organisations not registered will
be published separately.

If you would like to submit your reply on an anonymous basis
please indicate it belowby underlining the following answer:

Yes, I would like to submit my reply on an anonymous basis

Type of respondent(Pleaseunderlinethe appropriate):

End user/consumer(e.g. internet user, reader, subscriber to
music or audiovisual service, researcher, student) OR
Representative of end users/consumers

for the purposes of this questionnaire normally referred to
in questions as"end users/consumers"

Institutional user(e.g. school, university, research centre,
library, archive) OR Representative of institutional users

for the purposes of this questionnaire normally referred to
in questions as"institutional users"

Author/Performer OR Representative of authors/performers

Publisher/Producer/Broadcaster OR Representative of
publishers/producers/broadcasters

the two above categoriesare,for the purposes of this
questionnaire, normally referred to in questions as"right
holders"

Intermediary/Distributor/Other service provider(e.g. online
music or audiovisual service, games platform, social media,
search engine, ICT industry)OR Representative of
intermediaries/distributors/other service providers

for the purposesof this questionnaire normally referred to in
questions as"service providers"

Collective Management Organisation

Public authority

Member State

Other(Please explain):

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Rightsand the functioning of the Single Market

Why is it not possible to access many online content services
from anywhere in Europe?[The territorial scope of the rights
involved in digital transmissions and the segmentation of the
market through licensing agreements]

Holders of copyright and related rights – e.g. writers, singers,
musicians - do not enjoy a single protection in the EU. Instead,
they are protected on the basis of a bundle of national rights
in each Member State. Those rights have been largelyharmonised
by the existing EU Directives. However, differences remain and
the geographical scope of the rights is limited to the
territory of the Member State granting them. Copyright is thus
territorial in the sense that rights are acquired and
enforcedon a country-by-country basis under national law9

This principle has been confirmed by the Court of justice on
several occasions.

.

The dissemination of copyright-protected content on the Internet
– e.g. by a music streaming service, or by an online e-book
seller – therefore requires, in principle, an authorisation for
each national territory in which the content is communicated to
the public. Rightholders are, of course, in a position to grant
a multi-territorial or pan-European licence, such that content
services can be provided in several Member States and across
borders. A number of steps have been taken at EU level to
facilitate multi-territorial licences: the proposal for a
Directive on Collective Rights Management10

Proposal for a Directive of theEuropean Parliament and of the
Council of 11 July 2012 on collective management of copyright
and related rights and multi-territorial licensing of rights in
musical works for online uses in the internal market, COM(2012)
372 final.

should significantly facilitate the delivery of
multi-territorial licences in musical works for online
services11

Collective Management Organisations play a significant role in
the management of online rights for musical works in contrast
to the situation where online rightsare licensed directly by
right holders such as film or record producers or by newspaper
or book publishers.

; the structured stakeholder dialogue “Licences for Europe”12

You can find more information on the following website:
http://ec.europa.eu/licences-for-europe-dialogue/.

and market-led developments such as the on-going work in the
Linked Content Coalition13

You can find more information on the following
website:http://www.linkedcontentcoalition.org/.

.

"Licences for Europe" addressed in particular the specific issue
of cross-border portability, i.e. the ability of consumers
having subscribed to online services in their Member State to
keep accessing them when travelling temporarily to other Member
States. As a result, representatives of the audio-visual sector
issued a joint statement affirming their commitment to continue
working towards the further development of cross-border
portability14

See the document “Licences for Europe – tem pledges to bring
more content
online”:http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/copyright/docs/licences-for-europe/131113_ten-pledges_en.pdf.

.

Despite progress, there are continued problems with the
cross-border provision of, and access to, services. These
problems are most obvious to consumers wanting to access
services that are made available inMember States other than the
one in which they live. Not all online services are available in
all Member States and consumers face problems when trying
to access such services across borders. In some instances,
even if the “same” service is available in all Member States,
consumers cannot access the service across borders (they can
only access their “national” service, and if they try to access
the "same" service in another Member State they are redirected
to the one designated for their country of residence).

This situation may in part stem from the territoriality of
rights and difficulties associated with the clearing of rights
in different territories. Contractual clauses in licensing
agreements between right holders and distributors and/or
between distributors and end users may also be at the origin of
some of the problems (denial of access, redirection).

The main issue at stake here is, therefore, whether further
measures (legislative or non-legislative, including market-led
solutions) need to be takenat EU level in the medium term15

For possible long term measures such as the establishment of a
European Copyright Code (establishing a single title) see
section VII of this consultation document.

to increase the cross-border availability of content services in
the Single Market, while ensuring an adequate level of
protection for right holders.

[In particular if you are an end user/consumer:]Have you faced
problems when trying to access online services in an EU Member
State other than the one in which you live?

 YES - Please provide examples indicating the Member State,
the sector and the type of content concerned (e.g. premium
content such as certain films and TV series, audio-visual
content in general, music, e-books, magazines, journals
andnewspapers, games, applications and other software)

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO

 NO OPINION

[In particular if you are a service provider:]Have you faced
problems when seeking to provide online services across borders
in the EU?

 YES - Please explain whether such problems, in your
experience, are related to copyright or to other issues (e.g.
business decisions relating to the cost of providing services
across borders, compliance with other laws such asconsumer
protection)? Please provide examples indicating the Member
State, the sector and the type of content concerned (e.g.
premium content such as certain films and TV series,
audio-visual content in general, music, e-books, magazines,
journals and newspapers, games, applications and other
software).

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO

 NO OPINION

[In particular if you are a right holder or a collective
management organisation:]How often are you asked togrant
multi-territorial licences? Please indicate, if possible, the
number of requests per year and provide examples indicating the
Member State, the sector and the type of content concerned.

[Open question]

Non.

If you have identified problems in theanswers to any of the
questions above – what would be the best way to tackle them?

[Open question]

Néant

[In particular if you are a right holder or a collective
management organisation:]Are there reasons why, even in cases
where you hold all thenecessary rights for all the territories
in question, you would still find it necessary or justified to
impose territorial restrictions on a service provider (in
order, for instance, to ensure that access to certain content
is not possible in certain European countries)?

 YES – Please explain by giving examples

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO

 NO OPINION

[In particular if you are e.g. a broadcaster or a service
provider:]Are there reasons why, even in cases where you have
acquired all the necessary rights for all the territories in
question, you would still find it necessary or justified to
impose territorial restrictions on the service recipient (in
order for instance, to redirect the consumer to a different
website than the one he is trying to access)?

 YES – Please explain by giving examples

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO

 NO OPINION

Do you think that further measures (legislative or
non-legislative,including market-led solutions) are needed at
EU level to increase the cross-border availability of content
services in the Single Market, while ensuring an adequate level
of protection for right holders?

 YES – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO – Please explain

Les dispositions législatives instaurées par la directive de
2001 ont permis de maintenir un cadre souple et adapté à
l’exploitation des œuvres, notamment dans le but de permettre
ladisponibilité transfrontalière des services de contenu. Il
n’est donc pas nécessaire de prévoir une intervention
législative complémentaire en matière de droits d’auteur. En
revanche, des mesures visant à favoriser une plus grande
interopérabilité technique et à conduire à une harmonisation
fiscale pourraient plus largement permettre le développement
des échanges transfrontaliers.

 NO OPINION

Is there a need for more clarity as regards the scope of what
needs to be authorised (or not) in digital transmissions?[The
definition of the rights involved in digital transmissions]

The EU framework for the protection of copyright and related
rights in the digital environment is largely established by
Directive 2001/29/EC16

Directive 2001/29/EC of the European Parliament and of the
Council of 22 May 2001 on the harmonisation of certain aspects
of copyright and related rights in the information society.

on the harmonisation of certain aspects of copyright and related
rights in the information society. OtherEU directives in this
field that are relevant in the online environment are those
relating to the protection of software17

Directive 2009/24/EC of the European Parliament and of the
Council of 23 April 2009 on the legal protection of computer
programs.

and databases18

Directive 96/9/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council
of 11 March 1996 on the legal protection of databases.

.

Directive 2001/29/ECharmonises the rights of authors and
neighbouring rightholders19

Film and record producers, performers andbroadcasters are
holders of so-called “neighbouring rights” in, respectively,
their films, records, performances and broadcast. Authors’
content protected by copyright is referred to as a “work” or
“works”, while content protected by neighbouring rights
isreferred to as “other subject matter”.

which are essential for the transmission of digital copies of
works (e.g. an e-book) and other protected subject matter (e.g.
a record in a MP3 format) over the internet or similar digital
networks.

The mostrelevant rights for digital transmissions are the
reproduction right, i.e. the right to authorise or prohibit the
making of copies20

The right to “authorise or prohibit direct or indirect,
temporary or permanent reproduction by any means and in any
form,in whole or in part” (see Art. 2 of Directive 2001/29/EC)
although temporary acts of reproduction of a transient or
incidental nature are, under certain conditions, excluded (see
art. 5(1) of Directive 2001/29/EC).

, (notably relevant at the start of the transmission – e.g. the
uploading of a digital copy of a work to a server in view of
making it available – and at the users’ end – e.g. when a user
downloads a digital copy of a work) and the communication to
the public/making available right, i.e. the rights to authorise
or prohibit the dissemination of the works in digital networks21

The right to authorise or prohibit any communication to the
public by wire or wireless means and to authorise or prohibit
the making available to the public “on demand” (seeArt. 3 of
Directive 2001/29/EC).

. These rights are intrinsically linked in digital transmissions
and both need to be cleared.

The act of “making available”

Directive 2001/29/EC specifies neitherwhatis covered by the
making available right (e.g. the upload, the accessibility by
the public, the actual reception by the public) norwherethe act
of“making available” takes place. This does not raise questions
if the act is limited to a single territory. Questions arise
however when the transmission covers several territories and
rights need to be cleared (does the act of "making available"
happen in the country of the upload only? in each of the
countries where the content is potentially accessible? in each
of the countries where the content is effectively accessed?).
The most recent case law of the Court of Justice of the
European Union (CJEU) suggests that a relevant criterion is the
“targeting” of a certain Member State's public22

See in particular Case C-173/11 (Football Dataco vs Sportradar)
and Case C-5/11 (Donner) for copyright and related rights, and
Case C-324/09 (L’Oréal vs eBay) for trademarks. With regard to
jurisdiction see also joined Cases C-585/08 and C-144/09
(Pammer and Hotel Alpenhof) and pending CaseC-441/13 (Pez
Hejduk); see however, adopting a different approach, Case
C-170/12 (Pinckney vs KDG Mediatech).

. According to this approach the copyright-relevant act (which
has to be licensed) occurs at least in those countries which
are “targeted” by the online service provider. A service
provider “targets” a group of customers residing in a specific
country when it directs its activity to that group, e.g. via
advertisement, promotions, a language or a currency
specifically targeted at that group.

Is the scope of the “making available” right incross-border
situations – i.e. when content is disseminated across borders –
sufficiently clear?

 YES

 NO – Please explain how this could be clarified and what
type of clarification would be required (e.g. as in "targeting"
approach explained above, asin "country of origin" approach23

The objective of implementing a “country of origin” approach is
to localise the copyright relevant act that must be licenced in
a single Member State (the "country of origin", which could be
for example the Member Statein which the content is uploaded or
where the service provider is established), regardless of in how
many Member States the work can be accessed or received. Such an
approach has already been introduced at EU level with regard to
broadcasting by satellite(see Directive 93/83/EEC on the
coordination of certain rules concerning copyright and rights
related to copyright applicable to satellite broadcasting and
cable retransmission).

)

Pour les auteurs de l’écrit, cela ne pose pas de difficultés. En
France, laloi définit deux droits, le droit de reproduction et
le droit de représentation, qui sont cédés à l’éditeur pour
tous les modes d’exploitation du livre, y compris pour des
exploitations multi-territoriales.

 NO OPINION

[In particular if you are a rightholder:]Could a clarification
of the territorial scope of the “making available” right have
an effect on the recognition of your rights (e.g. whether you
are considered to be an author or not, whether you are
considered to have transferred your rights ornot), on your
remuneration, or on the enforcement of rights (including the
availability of injunctive relief24

Injunctive relief is a temporary or permanent remedy allowing
the right holder to stop or prevent an infringement of his/her
right.

)?

 YES – Please explain how such potential effects could be
addressed

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO

 NO OPINION

Two rights involved in a single act of exploitation

Each act of transmission in digital networks entails (in the
current state of technology and law) several reproductions.
This means that there are two rights that apply to digital
transmissions: the reproduction right and the making available
right. This may complicate the licensing of works for online
use notably when the two rights are held by different
persons/entities.

[In particular if you a service provider or a right holder:]Does
the application of two rights to a single act of economic
exploitation in the online environment (e.g. a download) create
problems for you?

 YES – Please explain what type of measures would be needed
in order to address such problems (e.g. facilitation of joint
licences when the rights are in different hands, legislation to
achieve the "bundling of rights")

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO

 NO OPINION

Linking and browsing

Hyperlinks are references to data that lead a user from one
location in the Internet to another. They are indispensable for
the functioningof the Internet as a network. Several cases are
pending before the CJEU25

Cases C-466/12 (Svensson), C-348/13 (Bestwater International)
and C-279/13 (C More entertainment).

in which the question has been raised whether the provision of
a clickable linkconstitutes an act of communication to the
public/making available to the public subject to the
authorisation of the rightholder.

A user browsing the internet (e.g. viewing a web-page) regularly
creates temporary copies of works and other
subject-matterprotected under copyright on the screen and in
the 'cache' memory of his computer. A question has been
referred to the CJEU26

Case C-360/13 (Public Relations Consultants Association Ltd).
See
alsohttp://www.supremecourt.gov.uk/decided-cases/docs/UKSC_2011_0202_PressSummary.pdf.

as to whether such copies are always covered by the mandatory
exception for temporary acts of reproduction provided for in
Article5(1) of Directive 2001/29/EC.

Should the provision of a hyperlink leading to a work or other
subject matter protected under copyright, either in general or
under specific circumstances, be subject to the authorisation
of the rightholder?

 YES – Pleaseexplain whether you consider this to be the case
in general, or under specific circumstances, and why

L’hyperlien vers un contenu protégé et commercialisé constitue
un acte de communication au public qui entre dans le champ du
droit d’auteur. Il nécessitedonc une autorisation préalable des
titulaires de droits. Lorsqu'un lien renvoie, sans objectif
commercial, à une œuvre librement accessible et légalement mise
en ligne sur Internet, et respecte le droit moral de l'auteur
d'origine, il ne nous semble pas nécessaire d’obtenir une
autorisation préalable. Les auteurs utilisent largement dans
leurs œuvres numériques cette possibilité qui fait
l’originalité et la richesse du réseau. Si ces hyperliens
sont utilisés par des opérateurs réalisant directementou
indirectement des profits par la diffusion de ces œuvres
enrichies, un partage juste et équitable de la valeur
commerciale induite doit être envisagé. Cela nécessite en
particulier une grande transparence des pratiques, une bonne
logistique pour un réglement rapidement efficace et dans les
temps des ayants droits. Cette question reste au coeur du
"droit d'auteur" car qu'est ce qu'un droit s'il ne donne dans
les fait accès à la rémunération due ?

 NO – Please explain whether you consider this to be the case
ingeneral, or under specific circumstances, and why (e.g.
because it does not amount to an act of communication to the
public – or to a new public, or because it should be covered by
a copyright exception)

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO OPINION

Should the viewing of a web-page where this implies the
temporary reproduction of a work or other subject matter
protected under copyright on the screen and in the cache memory
of the user’s computer, either in general or under specific
circumstances, be subject to the authorisation of the
rightholder?

 YES – Please explain whether you consider this to be the
case in general, or under specific circumstances, and why

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO – Please explain whether you consider this to be the case
in general, or under specific circumstances, and why (e.g.
because it is or should be covered by a copyright exception)

Le caractère strictement temporairedu téléchargement doit être
verifié et offrir les garanties nécessaires.

 NO OPINION

Download to own digital content

Digital content is increasingly being bought via digital
transmission (e.g. download to own). Questions arise as to the
possibility forusers to dispose of the files they buy in this
manner (e.g. by selling them or by giving them as a gift). The
principle of EU exhaustion of the distribution right applies in
the case of the distribution of physical copies (e.g. when a
tangible article such as a CD or a book, etc. is sold, the
right holder cannot prevent the further distribution of that
tangible article)27

See also recital 28 of Directive 2001/29/EC.

. The issue that arises here is whether this principle can also
be applied in the case of an act of transmission equivalent in
its effect to distribution (i.e. where the buyer acquires the
property of the copy)28

In Case C-128/11 (Oracle vs. UsedSoft) the CJEU ruled that an
author cannot oppose the resale of a second-hand licence that
allows downloading his computer program from his website and
using it for an unlimited period of time. The exclusive right
of distribution of a copy of a computer program covered by such
a licence is exhausted on its first sale. While it is thus
admitted that the distribution right may be subject to
exhaustion in case of computer programs offered for download
with the right holder’s consent, the Court was careful to
emphasise that it reached this decision based on the Computer
Programs Directive. It was stressed that this exhaustion rule
constituted alex specialisin relation to the Information
Society Directive (UsedSoft, par. 51, 56).

. This raises difficult questions,notably relating to the
practical application of such an approach (how to avoid
re-sellerskeeping and using a copy of a work after they have
“re-sold” it – this is often referred to as the “forward and
delete” question) as well as to the economic implications of
the creation of a second-hand market of copies of perfect
quality that never deteriorate (in contrast to the second-hand
market for physical goods).

[In particular if you are an end user/consumer:]Have you faced
restrictions when trying to resell digital files that you have
purchased (e.g. mp3 file, e-book)?

 YES – Please explain by giving examples

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO

 NO OPINION

[In particular if you are a right holder or a service provider:]
What would be the consequences of providing a legal framework
enabling the resaleof previously purchased digital content?
Please specify per market (type of content) concerned.

[Open question]

Dans le seul but de préserver l’existence même du droit
d’auteur, il faut exclure la possibilité d’appliquer
l’épuisement du droit à première revente aux copies de
livres numériques. La notion même de revente de fichiers
numériques ne peut pas exister dans le domaine du livre. En
dehors de la question technique du dessaisissement du fichier
revendu par le premier acheteur, impossible à contrôler en
pratique, il s’agit d’éviter le développement d’un marché qui
échapperait aux ayants droit, et qui viendrait en concurrence
directe avec le marché initial.

Registration of works and other subject matter – is it a good
idea?

Registration is not often discussed in copyright in the EU as
the existing international treaties in the area prohibit
formalities as a condition for the protection and exercise of
rights. However, this prohibition is not absolute29

For example, it does not affect “domestic” works –i.e. works
originating in the country imposing the formalities as opposed
to works originating in another country.

. Moreover a system of registration does not need to be made
compulsory or constitute a precondition for the protection and
exercise of rights. With a longer term of protection and with
the increased opportunities that digital technology provides
for the use of content (including older works and works that
otherwise would not have been disseminated), the advantages and
disadvantages of a systemof registration are increasingly being
considered30

On the basis of Article 3.6 of the Directive 2012/28/EU of the
European Parliament and of the Council of 25 October 2012 on
certain permitted uses of orphan works, a publicly accessible
online database is currently being set up by the Office for
Harmonisation of the Internal Market (OHIM) for the
registration of orphan works.

.

Would the creation of a registration system at EU level help in
the identification and licensing of works and other subject
matter?

 YES

 NO

 NO OPINION

What would be the possible advantages of such a system?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

What would be the possible disadvantages of such a system?

[Openquestion]

IL faudrait surtout qu'une base accessible aux auteurs publie de
manière fiable le nombre d'exemplaires vendus afin que le calcul
des droits d'auteurs puissent être vérifiés et qu'il existe une
plus grande transparence sur la volumétrie des marchés et les
segments du livre, notamment comme guide pour les auteurs.

What incentives for registration by rightholders could be
envisaged?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

How to improve the use and interoperability of identifiers

There are many private databases of works and other subject
matter held by producers, collective management organisations,
and institutions such as libraries, which are based to
a greater or lesser extent on the use of(more or less)
interoperable, internationally agreed ‘identifiers’.
Identifiers can be compared to a reference number embedded in a
work, are specific to the sector in which they have been
developed31

E.g. the International Standard Recording Code (ISRC)is used to
identify recordings, the International Standard Book Number
(ISBN) is used to identify books.

, and identify, variously, the work itself, the owner or the
contributor to a work or other subject matter. There are
notable examples of where industryis undertaking actions to
improve the interoperability of such identifiers and databases.
The Global Repertoire Database32

You will find more information about this initiative on the
following website:http://www.globalrepertoiredatabase.com/.

should, once operational, provide a single source of information
on the ownership and control of musical works worldwide. The
Linked Content Coalition33

Youwill find more information about this initiative (funded in
part by the European Commission) on the following website:
www.linkedcontentcoalition.org.

was established to develop building blocks for the expression
and management of rights and licensing across all content and
media types. It includes the development of a Rights Reference
Model (RRM) – a comprehensive data model for all types of
rights in all types of content. The UK Copyright Hub34

You will find more information about this initiative on
thefollowing website:http://www.copyrighthub.co.uk/.

is seeking to take such identification systems a step further,
and to create a linked platform, enabling automated licensing
across different sectors.

Whatshould be the role of the EU in promoting the adoption
of identifiers in the content sector, and in promoting the
development and interoperability of rights ownership and
permissions databases?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Term of protection – is it appropriate?

Works and other subject matter are protected under copyright for
a limited period of time. After the term of protection has
expired, a work falls into the public domain and can be freely
used by anyone (in accordance with the applicable national
rules on moral rights). The Berne Convention35

Berne Convention for the Protection of Literary and Artistic
Works,http://www.wipo.int/treaties/en/ip/berne/.

requires a minimum term of protection of 50 years after the
death of the author. The EU rules extend this term of
protection to 70 years after the death of the author (as do
many other countries, e.g. the US).

With regard to performers in the music sector and phonogram
producers, the term provided for in the EU rules also extend 20
years beyond what is mandated in international agreements,
providing for a term of protection of 70 years after the first
publication. Performers and producers in the audio-visual
sector, however, do not benefit from such an extended term of
protection.

Are the current terms of copyright protection still appropriate
in the digital environment?

YES – Please explain

La durée de protection des droits d’auteur a fait l’objet d’une
directive européenne récente, et la durée de 70 ans après la
date de décès de l’auteur ne pose pas de problèmes particuliers
au regard des exploitations numériques. Le numérique permet en
effet d’envisager desexploitations plus longues et pour un plus
grand nombre de titres justifiant ainsi la préservation, sur
cette période, des droits patrimoniaux. Par ailleurs, cela
permet aux ayants droit de continuer à faire vivre l’œuvre de
l’auteur après son décès : participation à des événements,
organisation de manifestations autour de l’auteur, recherche de
publications pour les œuvres, etc... Il est important de
rappeler que la durée de protection des œuvres est et doit
rester distincte de la durée des cessions consenties par
l’auteur, celles-ci pouvant être autorisées pour des périodes
inférieures.

 NO – Please explain if they should be longer or shorter

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO OPINION

Limitations andexceptions in the Single Market

Limitations and exceptions to copyright and related rights
enable the use of works and other protected subject-matter,
without obtaining authorisation from the rightholders, for
certain purposes and to a certain extent (forinstance the use
for illustration purposes of an extract from a novel by a
teacher in a literature class). At EU level they are
established in a number of copyright directives, most notably
Directive 2001/29/EC36

Plus Directive 96/9/ECon the legal protection of
databases;Directive 2009/24/ECon the legal protection of
computer programs,and Directive 92/100/ECon rental right and
lending right.

.

Exceptions and limitations in the national and EU copyright laws
have to respect international law37

Article9(2) of the Berne Convention for the Protection of
Literary and Artistic Works (1971); Article 13 of the TRIPS
Agreement (Trade Related Intellectual Property Rights) 1994;
Article 16(2) of the WIPO Performers and Phonograms Treaty
(1996); Article 9(2) ofthe WIPO Copyright Treaty (1996).

. In accordance with international obligations, the EU acquis
requires that limitations and exceptions can only be applied in
certain special cases which do not conflict with a normal
exploitation of the work or other subject matter and do not
unreasonably prejudice the legitimate interest of the
rightholders.

Whereas the catalogue of limitations and exceptions included in
EU law is exhaustive (no other exceptions can be applied to the
rights harmonised at EU level)38

Other than the grandfathering of the exceptions of minor
importance for analogue uses existing in Member States at the
time of adoption of Directive 2001/29/EC (see, Art. 5(3)(o)).

, these limitations and exceptions are often optional39

With the exception ofcertain limitations: (i) in the Computer
Programs Directive, (ii) in the Database Directive, (iii)
Article 5(1) in the Directive 2001/29/EC and (iv) the Orphan
Works Directive.

, in the sense that Member States are free to reflect in
national legislation asmany or as few of them as they wish.
Moreover, the formulation of certain of the limitations and
exceptions is general enough to give significant flexibility to
the Member States as to how, and to what extent, to implement
them (if they decide to do so).Finally, it is worth noting that
not all of the limitations and exceptions included in the EU
legal framework for copyright are of equivalent significance in
policy terms and in terms of their potential effect on the
functioning of the Single Market.

In addition, in the same manner that the definition of the
rights is territorial (i.e. has an effect only within the
territory of the Member State), the definition of the
limitations and exceptions to the rights is territorial too (so
an act that is covered byan exception in a Member State "A" may
still require the authorisation of the rightholder once we move
to the Member State "B")40

Only the exception established in the recent Orphan Works
Directive (a mandatory exception to copyright and related
rights in the case where the rightholders are not known or
cannot be located) has been given a cross-border effect, which
means that, for instance, once a literary work – for instance a
novel – is considered an orphan work in a Member State, that
same novel shallbe considered an orphan work in all Member
States and can be used and accessed in all Member States.

.

The cross-border effect of limitations and exceptions also
raises the question of fair compensation of rightholders. In
some instances, Member States areobliged to compensate
rightholders for the harm inflicted on them by a limitation or
exception to their rights. In other instances Member States are
not obliged, but may decide, to provide for such compensation.
If a limitation or exception triggering a mechanism of fair
compensation were to be given cross-border effect (e.g. the
books are used for illustration in an online course given by an
university in a Member State "A" and the students are in a
Member State "B") then there would also be a need to clarify
which national law should determine the level of that
compensation and who should pay it.

Finally, the question of flexibility and adaptability is being
raised: what is the best mechanism to ensure that the EU and
Member States’ regulatory frameworksadapt when necessary
(either to clarify that certain uses are covered by an
exception or to confirm that for certain uses the authorisation
of rightholders is required)? The main question here is whether
a greater degree of flexibility can be introduced inthe EU and
Member States regulatory framework while ensuring the required
legal certainty, including for the functioning of the Single
Market, and respecting the EU's international obligations.

Are there problems arising from the fact that most limitations
and exceptions provided in the EU copyright directives are
optional for the Member States?

 YES – Please explain by referring to specific cases

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO OPINION

Should some/all of the exceptions be made mandatory and, if so,
is there a need for a higher level of harmonisation of such
exceptions?

 YES – Please explain by referring to specific cases

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO OPINION

Should any new limitations and exceptionsbe added to or removed
from the existing catalogue?Please explain by referring to
specific cases.

[Open question]

Non, la liste actuelle des exceptions prévues par la directive
répond à toutes les situations.Il ne nous semble pas
nécessaire d’en ajouter.

Independently from the questions above, is there a need to
provide for a greater degree of flexibility in the EU
regulatory framework for limitations and exceptions?

 YES – Please explain why

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO – Please explain why

Le système des exceptions prévues par la Directive est à la fois
souple et encadré, notamment par le test en trois étapes. Il ne
nous semble pas nécessaire de modifier cet équilibre, qui
nepourrait qu’entraîner une insécurité juridique.

 NO OPINION

If yes, what would be the best approach to provide for
flexibility? (e.g. interpretation by national courts and the
ECJ, periodic revisions of the directives, interpretations by
the Commission,built-in flexibility, e.g. in the form of a
fair-use or fair dealing provision / open norm, etc.)? Please
explain indicating what would be the relative advantages and
disadvantages of such an approach as well as its possible
effects on the functioning ofthe Internal Market.

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Does the territoriality of limitations and exceptions, in your
experience, constitute a problem?

 YES – Please explain why and specify whichexceptions you are
referring to

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO – Please explain why and specify which exceptions you are
referring to

Dans le domaine de l’écrit, nous n’avons pas constaté de
problèmes spécifiques à la territorialité des exceptions ou
limitations.

 NO OPINION

In the event that limitations and exceptions established at
national level were to have cross-border effect, how should the
question of “fair compensation” be addressed, when
suchcompensation is part of the exception? (e.g. who pays whom,
where?)

[Open question]

La question de la prise en charge de la compensation peut se
révéler délicate. Elle devrait théoriquement être prise en
charge par le pays importateur, le pays dans lequel se trouve
le bénéficiaire de l’exception.

Access to content in libraries and archives

Directive 2001/29/EC enables Member States to reflect in their
national law a range of limitations and exceptions for the
benefit of publicly accessible libraries, educational
establishments and museums, as well as archives. If
implemented, these exceptions allow acts of preservation and
archiving41

Article 5(2)c of Directive 2001/29.

and enable on-site consultation of the works and other subject
matter in the collections of such institutions42

Article 5(3)n of Directive 2001/29.

. The public lending (under an exception or limitation) by these
establishments of physical copies of works and other subject
matter is governed by the Rental and Lending Directive43

Article 5of Directive 2006/115/EC.

.

Questions arise as to whether the current framework continues to
achieve the objectives envisaged or whether it needs to be
clarified or updated to cover use in digital networks. At the
same time, questions arise as to the effect of such a possible
expansion on the normal exploitation of works and other subject
matter and as to the prejudice this may cause to rightholders.
The role of licensing and possible framework agreements between
different stakeholders also needs to be considered here.

Preservation and archiving

The preservation of the copies of works or other subject-matter
held in the collections of cultural establishments (e.g. books,
records, or films) – the restoration or replacement of works,
the copying of fragileworks - may involve the creation of
another copy/ies of these works or other subject matter. Most
Member States provide for an exception in their national laws
allowing for the making of such preservation copies. The scope
of the exception differs from Member State to Member State (as
regards the type of beneficiary establishments, the types of
works/subject-matter covered by the exception, the mode of
copying and the number of reproductions that a beneficiary
establishment may make). Also, the current legal status of new
types of preservation activities (e.g. harvesting and archiving
publicly available web content) is often uncertain.

(a)[In particular if you are an institutional user:]Have you
experienced specific problems when trying to use an exceptionto
preserve and archive specific works or other subject matter in
your collection?

(b)[In particular if you are a right holder:]Have you
experienced problems with the use by libraries, educational
establishments, museum or archives of the
preservationexception?

 YES – Please explain, by Member State, sector, and the type
of use in question.

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO

 NO OPINION

If there are problems, how would they best be solved?

[Openquestion]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

If your view is that a legislative solution is needed, what
would be its main elements? Which activities of the beneficiary
institutions should be covered and underwhich conditions?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

If your view is that a different solution is needed, what would
it be?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Off-premises access to library collections

Directive 2001/29/EC provides an exception for the consultation
of works and other subject-matter (consulting an e-book,
watching a documentary) via dedicated terminals on thepremises
of such establishments for the purpose of research and private
study. The online consultation of works and other
subject-matter remotely (i.e. when the library user is not on
the premises of the library) requires authorisation and is
generally addressed in agreements between
universities/libraries and publishers. Some argue that the law
rather than agreements should provide for the possibility to,
and the conditions for, granting online access to collections.

(a)[In particular if you are an institutional user:]Have you
experienced specific problems when trying to negotiate
agreements with rights holders that enable you to provide
remote access, including across borders, to your collections
(or parts thereof) for purposes of research and privatestudy?

(b)[In particular if you are an end user/consumer:]Have you
experienced specific problems when trying to consult, including
across borders, works and other subject-matter held in the
collections of institutions such as universities and
nationallibraries when you are not on the premises of the
institutions in question?

(c)[In particular if you are aright holder:]Have you negotiated
agreements with institutional users that enable those
institutions to provide remote access, including across
borders, to the works or other subject-matter in their
collections, for purposes of research and private study?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

If there are problems, how would they best be solved?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

If your view is that a legislative solution is needed, what
would be its main elements? Which activities of the beneficiary
institutions should be covered and under which conditions?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

If your view is that a different solution is needed, what would
it be?

[Open question]

Il n’est pas nécessaire de recourir à la voielégislative. La
voie contractuelle permet de négocier les autorisations
nécessaires entre bibliothèques et éditeurs et de prévoir une
juste rémunération (le cas échéant, au travers d’une gestion
collective). L’exception actuelle doit rester prioritairementà
des fins de conservation, et être limitée à la consultation sur
place.

E – lending

Traditionally, public libraries have loaned physical copies of
works (i.e. books, sometimes also CDs and DVDs) to their users.
Recent technological developments have made it technically
possible for libraries to provide users with temporary access
to digital content, such as e-books, music or films via
networks. Under the current legal framework, libraries need to
obtain the authorisation of the rights holders to organisesuch
e-lending activities. In various Member States, publishers and
libraries are currently experimenting with different business
models for the making available of works online, including
direct supply of e-books to libraries by publishers or bundling
byaggregators.

(a)[In particular if you are alibrary:]Have you experienced
specific problems when trying to negotiate agreements to enable
the electronic lending (e-lending), including across borders, of
books or other materials held in your collection?

(b)[In particular if you are an end user/consumer:]Have you
experienced specific problems when trying to borrow books or
other materials electronically (e-lending), including across
borders, from institutions such as public libraries?

(c)[Inparticular if you are aright holder:]Have you negotiated
agreements with libraries to enable them to lend books or other
materials electronically, including across borders?

 YES – Please explain with specific examples

En France, le ministère de la Culture a récemment créé un groupe
de travail composé de représentants d’auteurs, d’éditeurs, de
librairies et de bibliothèques. À ce jour, les travaux de ce
groupe s’orientent vers une définition des offres que
pourraient effectuer directement les éditeurs auxbibliothèques
dans le cadre de prêt de livres numériques, et la rédaction
d’un « code des bons usages » pour la profession. Le cadre
contractuel est donc pour le moment privilégié, sous réserve
d’une juste et équitable rémunération des auteurs.

 NO

 NO OPINION

If there are problems, how would they best be solved?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

The following two questions are relevant both to this point (n°
3) and the previous one (n° 2).

[In particular if you are an institutional user:]What
differences do you see in the management of physical and online
collections, including providing access to your subscribers?
What problems have you encountered?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

[In particular if you are a right holder:]What difference do you
see between libraries’ traditional activities such as
on-premises consultation or public lending and activitiessuch
as off-premises (online, at a distance) consultation and
e-lending? What problems have you encountered?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Mass digitisation

The term “mass digitisation” isnormally used to refer to efforts
by institutions such as libraries and archives to digitise (e.g.
scan) the entire content or part of their collections with an
objective to preserve these collections and, normally, to make
them available to the public. Examples are efforts by libraries
to digitise novels form the early part of the 20thcentury or
whole collections of pictures of historical value. This matter
has been partly addressed at the EU level by the 2011
Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) on key principles on the
digitisation and making available of out of commerce works
(i.e. works which are no longer found in the normal channels of
commerce), which is aiming to facilitate mass digitisation
efforts (for books and learned journals) on the basis of
licence agreements between libraries and similar cultural
institutions on the one hand and the collecting societies
representing authors and publishers on the other44

You will find more information about his MoU on the following
website:http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/copyright/out-of-commerce/index_en.htm.

. Provided the required funding is ensured (digitisation
projects are extremely expensive), the result of this MoU
should be that books that are currently to be found only in the
archives of, for instance, libraries will be digitised and made
available online to everyone. The MoU is based on voluntary
licences (granted by Collective ManagementOrganisations on the
basis of the mandates they receive from authors and
publishers). Some Member States may need to enact legislation
to ensure the largest possible effect of such licences (e.g. by
establishing in legislation a presumption of representation of
a collecting society or the recognition of an “extended
effect” to the licences granted)45

France and Germany have already adopted legislation to back the
effects of the MoU.The French act (LOI n° 2012-287 du 1er mars
2012 relative à l'exploitationnumérique des livres
indisponibles du xxe siècle) foresees collective management,
unless the author or publisher in question opposes such
management.The German act (Gesetz zur Nutzung verwaister und
vergriffener Werke und einer weiteren Änderung des
Urheberrechtsgesetzes vom 1.Oktober 2013) contains a legal
presumption of representation by a collecting society in
relation to works whose rightholders are not members of the
collecting society.

.

[In particular if you are an institutional user,engaging
orwanting to engage in mass digitisation projects, a right
holder, a collective management organisation:]Would it be
necessary in your country to enact legislation to ensure that
the results of the 2011 MoU (i.e. the agreements concluded
between librariesand collecting societies) have a cross-border
effect so that out of commerce works can be accessed across the
EU?

 YES – Please explain why and how it could best be achieved

En France, le législateur a adopté une loi sur les livres
indisponibles en mars2012, basée sur un système de gestion
collective. Cette loi a pour objectif de rendre à nouveau
disponible le patrimoine littéraire français du XXème siècle en
instituant un système de gestion collective pour l’exploitation
de ces œuvres. Ce dispositif innovant, puisqu'il assouplit
l'exercice du droit sans cession des droits d'auteur, est
respectueux de la titularité de ces droits. Il prévoit
notamment pour l'auteur une possibilité d’opposition avant tout
numérisation et de retrait sans justification à toutmoment du
processus, ainsi qu’une juste rémunération en cas
d’exploitation du livre numérique. À terme, cela remplit
l’objectif de disponibilité des livres en format numérique.
Ce dispositif, qui s'inscrit dans la ligne du protocole
d'accord de la Commission européenne de septembre 2011, est
plus protecteur des intérêts des auteurs qu'une exception qui
limiterait nécessairement leurs droits.

 NO – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO OPINION

Would it be necessary to develop mechanisms, beyond those
already agreed for other types of content (e.g. for audio- or
audio-visual collections, broadcasters’ archives)?

 YES – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO OPINION

Teaching

Directive 2001/29/EC46

Article 5(3)a of Directive 2001/29.

enables Member States to implement in their national legislation
limitations and exceptions for the purpose of illustration for
non-commercial teaching. Such exceptions would typically allow
a teacher to use parts of or full works to illustrate his
course, e.g. by distributing copies of fragments of a book or
of newspaper articles in the classroom or by showing protected
content on a smart board without having to obtain authorisation
from the right holders. The open formulation of this (optional)
provision allows for rather different implementation at Member
States level. The implementation of the exception differs from
Member State to Member State, with several Member States
providing instead a framework for the licensing of content for
certain educational uses. Some argue that the law should
provide for better possibilities for distance learning and
study at home.

(a)[In particular if you are an end user/consumer or an
institutional user:]Have you experienced specific problems when
trying to use works or other subject-matter for illustration for
teaching, includingacross borders?

(b)[In particular if you are a right holder:]Have you
experienced specific problems resulting from the way in which
works or other subject-matter are used for illustration for
teaching, including across borders?

 YES – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO

 NO OPINION

If there are problems, how would they best be solved?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Whatmechanisms exist in the market place to facilitate the use
of content for illustration for teaching purposes? How
successful are they?

[Open question]

Les accords signés depuis le 1er janvier 2009, date d’entrée en
vigueur de l’exception pédagogique, entre les ayants droit et
le ministère de l’Éducation nationale et de l’Enseignement
supérieur peuvent être améliorés et adaptés en tenant compte
des spécificités du système éducatif dans chaque État membre,
et dans un cadre contractuel qui permet une flexibilité
indispensable en la matière.

If your view is that a legislative solution is needed, what
would be its main elements? Which activities of the beneficiary
institutions should be covered and under what conditions?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

If your view is that a different solution is needed, what would
it be?

[Open question]

Les ayants droit proposent un système de gestion collective
obligatoire, qui n’a pas reçu,pour l’instant, l’aval des
pouvoirs publics. Cette solution permettrait pourtant de
simplifier la situation pour les enseignants, en leur assurant
un cadre légal clair et précis.

Research

Directive 2001/29/EC47

Article 5(3)a of Directive 2001/29.

enables Member States to choose whether to implement in their
national laws a limitation for the purpose of non-commercial
scientific research. The open formulation of this (optional)
provision allows for rather different implementations at Member
States level.

(a)[In particular if you are an end user/consumer or an
institutional user:]Have you experienced specific problems when
trying to use works or other subject matter in the context of
research projects/activities, including across borders?

(b)[Inparticular if you are a right holder:]Have you experienced
specific problems resulting from the way in which works or other
subject-matter are used in the context of research
projects/activities, including across borders?

 YES – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO

 NO OPINION

If there are problems, how would they best be solved?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

What mechanismsexist in the Member States to facilitate the use
of content for research purposes? How successful are they?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Disabilities

Directive 2001/29/EC48

Article 5 (3)b ofDirective 2001/29.

provides for an exception/limitation for the benefit of people
with a disability. The open formulation of this (optional)
provision allows for rather different implementations at Member
States level. At EU and international level projects have been
launched to increase the accessibility of works and other
subject-matter for persons with disabilities (notably by
increasing the number of works published in special formats and
facilitating their distribution across the European Union)49

The European Trusted Intermediaries Network (ETIN) resulting
from a Memorandum of Understanding between representatives of
the right-holder community (publishers, authors, collecting
societies) and interested parties such as associations for
blind and dyslexic persons
(http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/copyright/initiatives/access/index_en.htm)
and the Trusted Intermediary Global Accessible Resources (TIGAR)
project in WIPO (http://www.visionip.org/portal/en/).

.

The Marrakesh Treaty50

Marrakesh Treaty to Facilitate Access to Published Works by
Visually Impaired Persons and Persons with Print Disabilities,
Marrakesh, June 17 to 28 2013.

has been adopted to facilitate access to published works for
persons who are blind, visually impaired, or otherwise print
disabled. The Treaty creates a mandatory exception to copyright
that allows organisations for the blind toproduce, distribute
and make available accessible format copies to visually
impaired persons without the authorisation of the rightholders.
The EU and its Member States have started work to sign and
ratify the Treaty. This may require the adoption of certain
provisions at EU level (e.g. to ensure the possibility to
exchange accessible format copies across borders).

(a)[In particular if you are a person with a disability or an
organisation representing persons with disabilities:]Have you
experienced problems with accessibility to content, including
across borders, arising from Member States’ implementation of
this exception?

(b)[In particular if you are an organisation providing services
for persons with disabilities:]Have you experienced problems
whendistributing/communicating works published in special
formats across the EU?

(c)[In particular if you are a right holder:]Have you
experienced specific problems resulting from the application of
limitations or exceptions allowing for the
distribution/communication of works published in special
formats, including across borders?

 YES – Please explain by giving examples

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO

 NO OPINION

If there are problems, what could be doneto improve
accessibility?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

What mechanisms exist in the market place to facilitate
accessibility to content? How successful are they?

[Open question]

La meilleuresolution pour une plus grande accessibilité des
personnes handicapées aux œuvres de l’esprit réside dans le
développement d’une offre commerciale adaptée au plus grand
nombre de handicaps.

Text and data mining

Text and data mining/content mining/data analytics51

For the purpose of the present document, the term “text and data
mining” will be used.

are different terms used to describe increasingly important
techniques used in particular by researchers for the
exploration of vast amounts of existing textsand data (e.g.,
journals, web sites, databases etc.). Through the use of
software or other automated processes, an analysis is made of
relevant texts and data in order to obtain new insights,
patterns and trends.

The texts and data used for mining are either freely accessible
on the internet or accessible through subscriptions to e.g.
journals and periodicals that give access to the databases of
publishers. A copy is made of the relevant texts and data (e.g.
on browser cache memories or in computers RAM memories or onto
the hard disk of a computer), prior to the actual analysis.
Normally, it is considered that to mine protected works or
other subject matter, it is necessary to obtain authorisation
from the right holders for the making of such copies unlesssuch
authorisation can be implied (e.g. content accessible to general
public without restrictions on the internet, open access).

Some argue that the copies required for text and data mining are
covered by the exception for temporary copies in Article 5.1of
Directive 2001/29/EC. Others consider that text and data mining
activities should not even be seen as covered by copyright. None
of this is clear, in particular since text and data mining does
not consist only of a single method, but can be undertakenin
several different ways. Important questions also remain as to
whether the main problems arising in relation to this issue go
beyond copyright (i.e. beyond the necessity or not to obtain
the authorisation to use content) and relate rather to the need
toobtain “access” to content (i.e. being able to use e.g.
commercial databases).

A specific Working Group was set up on this issue in the
framework of the "Licences for Europe" stakeholder dialogue. No
consensus was reached among participating stakeholderson either
the problems to be addressed or the results. At the same time,
practical solutions to facilitate text and data mining of
subscription-based scientific content were presented by
publishers as an outcome of “Licences for Europe”52

See the document“Licences for Europe – ten pledges to bring more
content
online”:http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/copyright/docs/licences-for-europe/131113_ten-pledges_en.pdf.

. In the context of these discussions, other stakeholders argued
that no additional licences should be required to mine material
to which access has been provided through a subscription
agreement and considered that a specific exception for text and
data mining should be introduced, possibly on the basis of
a distinction between commercial and non-commercial.

(a)[In particular if you are an end user/consumer or an
institutional user:]Have you experienced obstacles, linked
tocopyright, when trying to use text or data mining methods,
including across borders?

(b)[In particular if you are a service provider:]Have you
experienced obstacles, linked to copyright, when providing
services based on text or data mining methods, including across
borders?

(c)[In particular if you are a right holder:]Have you
experienced specific problems resulting from the use of text
and data mining in relation to copyright protected content,
including across borders?

 YES – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO – Please explain

Des solutions contractuelles peuvent être privilégiées,
individuelles ou collectives. Si les acteurs de ce secteur
créent de la valeur à partir de contenus protégés,il est
logique que les titulaires de droit sur ces contenus puissent
en autoriser l’utilisation et être rémunérés.

 NO OPINION

If there are problems, how would they best be solved?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

If your view is that a legislative solution is needed, what
would be its main elements? Which activities should be covered
and under what conditions?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

If your view is that a different solution is needed, what would
it be?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Are there other issues, unrelated to copyright, thatconstitute
barriers to the use of text or data mining methods?

[Open question] ……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

User-generated content

Technological and service developments mean that citizens can
copy, use anddistribute content at little to no financial cost.
As a consequence, new types of online activities are developing
rapidly, including the making of so-called “user-generated
content”. While users can create totally original content, they
can also take oneor several pre-existing works, change something
in the work(s), and upload the result on the Internet e.g. to
platforms and blogs53

A typical example could be the “kitchen” or “wedding” video
(adding one's own video to a pre-existing sound recording),
oradding one's own text to a pre-existing photograph. Other
examples are “mash-ups” (blending two sound recordings), and
reproducing parts of journalistic work (report, review etc.) in
a blog.

. User-generated content (UGC) can thus cover the modification
ofpre-existing works even if the newly-generated/"uploaded"
work does not necessarily require a creative effort and results
from merely adding, subtracting or associating some pre-existing
content with other pre-existing content. This kind of activity
is not“new” as such. However, the development of social
networking and social media sites that enable users to share
content widely has vastly changed the scale of such activities
and increased the potential economic impact for those holding
rights in the pre-existing works. Re-use is no longer the
preserve of a technically and artistically adept elite. With
the possibilities offered by the new technologies, re-use is
open to all, at no cost. This in turn raises questions with
regard to fundamental rights such the freedom of expression and
the right to property.

A specific Working Group was set up on this issue in the
framework of the "Licences for Europe" stakeholder dialogue. No
consensus was reached among participating stakeholders on either
the problems to beaddressed or the results or even the
definition of UGC. Nevertheless, a wide range of views were
presented as to the best way to respond to this phenomenon. One
view was to say that a new exception is needed to cover UGC, in
particular non-commercial activities by individuals such as
combining existing musical works with videos, sequences of
photos, etc. Another view was that no legislative change is
needed: UGC is flourishing, and licensing schemes are
increasingly available (licence schemes concluded between
rightholders and platforms as well as micro-licences concluded
between rightholders and the users generating the content. In
any event, practical solutions to ease user-generated content
and facilitate micro-licensing for small users were pledged by
rightholders across different sectors as a result of the
“Licences for Europe” discussions54

See the document “Licences for Europe – ten pledges to bring
more content
online”:http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/copyright/docs/licences-for-europe/131113_ten-pledges_en.pdf.

.

(a)[In particular if you are an end user/consumer:]Have you
experienced problems when trying to use pre-existing worksor
other subject matter to disseminate new content on the
Internet, including across borders?

(b)[In particular if you are a service provider:]Have you
experienced problems when users publish/disseminate new content
based on the pre-existing works or other subject-matter through
your service, including across borders?

(c)[In particular if you are a right holder:]Have you
experienced problems resulting from the way the users are using
pre-existing works or other subject-matter to disseminate new
contenton the Internet, including across borders?

 YES – Please explain by giving examples

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO

 NO OPINION

(a)[In particular if you are an end user/consumer or a right
holder:]Have you experienced problems when trying to ensure
that the work you have created (on the basis of pre-existing
works) is properly identified for online use? Are proprietary
systems sufficient in this context?

(b)[In particular if you are a service provider:]Do you provide
possibilities for users that are publishing/disseminating the
works they have created (on the basis of pre-existing works)
through your service to properly identify these works for
online use?

 YES – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO OPINION

(a)[In particular if you are an end user/consumer or a right
holder):]Have you experienced problems when trying to be
remunerated for the use of the work you have created (on the
basis of pre-existing works)?

(b)[In particular if you are a service provider:]Do you provide
remuneration schemes for users publishing/disseminating the
works they have created (on the basis of pre-existing works)
through your service?

 YES – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO OPINION

If there are problems, how would they best be solved?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

If your view is that a legislative solution is needed,what would
be its main elements? Which activities should be covered and
under what conditions?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

If your view is that a different solution is needed, what would
itbe?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Private copying and reprography

Directive 2001/29/EC enables Member States to implement in their
national legislation exceptions or limitations to
thereproduction right for copies made for private use and
photocopying55

Article 5. 2)(a) and (b) of Directive 2001/29.

. Levies are charges imposed at national level on goods
typically used for such purposes (blank media, recording
equipment, photocopying machines, mobile listening devices such
as mp3/mp4 players, computers, etc.) with a view to compensating
rightholders for the harm they suffer when copies are made
without their authorisation by certain categories of persons
(i.e. natural persons making copies for their private use) or
through use of certain technique (i.e. reprography). In that
context, levies are important for rightholders.

With the constant developments in digital technology, the
question arises as to whether the copying of files by
consumers/end-users who have purchased content online - e.g.
when a person has bought an MP3 file and goes on to store
multiple copies of that file (in her computer, her tablet and
her mobile phone) - also triggers, or should trigger, the
application of privatecopying levies. It is argued that, in
some cases, these levies may indeed be claimed by rightholders
whether or not the licence fee paid by the service provider
already covers copies made by the end user. This approach could
potentially lead to instances of double payments whereby levies
could be claimed on top of service providers’ licence fees56

Communication "Unleashing the Potential of Cloud Computing in
Europe", COM(2012) 529 final.

57

These issues were addressed in the recommendations of Mr António
Vitorino resulting from the mediation on private copying and
reprography levies. You can consult these recommendations on
the following
website:http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/copyright/docs/levy_reform/130131_levies-vitorino-recommendations_en.pdf.

.

There is also an on-going discussion as to the application or
not of levies to certain types of cloud-based services such as
personal lockers or personal video recorders.

In your view, is there a need to clarify at the EU level the
scope and application of the private copying and reprography
exceptions58

Art. 5.2(a) and 5.2(b) of Directive 2001/29/EC.

in the digital environment?

YES – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO – Please explain

En France, pour le domaine de l’écrit, les deux systèmes
fonctionnent de manière satisfaisante, par l’intermédiaire des
sociétés degestion collective qui en ont la charge. L’arrivée
du numérique ne remet pas en cause cette gestion. Par contre
dans le cas du paiement proportionnel, la capacité pour les
auteurs à disposer d'une source fiable de la volumétrie
relative à la fréquentationde leur oeuvre reste un problème à
régler.Cela conditionne le paiement juste des droits d'auteur.

 NO OPINION

Should digital copies made by end users for private purposes in
the context of a service that has been licensed by
rightholders, and where theharm to the rightholder is minimal,
be subject to private copying levies?59

This issue was also addressed in the recommendations of Mr
Antonio Vitorino resulting from the mediation on private
copying and reprography levies

YES – Please explain

Le régime de l’exception pour copie privée couvre bien les
usages actuels et ne nécessite pas d’être modifié.

 NO – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO OPINION

How would changes in levies with respectto the application to
online services (e.g. services based on cloud computing
allowing, for instance, users to have copies on different
devices) impact the development and functioning of new business
models on the one hand and rightholders’ revenue on the other?

[Open question]

Dans le domaine de l’écrit, l’impact est sans doute marginal.
Néanmoins, dans le cadre de la rémunération des ayants droit,
la copie privée permet d’appréhender les nouveaux services,
comme par exemple le « stockage dans les nuages ». Dans ce cas,
il n’y a pas à modifier le régime de la copie privée, mais
seulement de l’étendre à ces usages.

Would you see an added value in making levies visible on the
invoices for products subject to levies?60

This issue was also addressed in the recommendations of Mr
Antonio Vitorino resulting from the mediation on private
copying and reprography levies.

YES – Please explain

La loi française du 20 décembre 2011 prévoit que l’acquéreur
d’un support d’enregistrement doit être informé du montantde
la rémunération pour copie privée auquel il est assujetti. Les
modalités pratiques ont été complétées par un décret du 12
décembre 2013. Ces mesures seront applicables à compter du 1er
avril 2014.

NO – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO OPINION

Diverging national systems levy different products and apply
different tariffs. This results in obstacles to the free
circulation of goods and services in the Single Market. At the
same time, manyMember States continue to allow the
indiscriminate application of private copying levies to all
transactions irrespective of the person to whom the product
subject to a levy is sold (e.g. private person or business). In
that context, not all Member Stateshave ex ante exemption and/or
ex post reimbursement schemes which could remedy these
situations and reduce the number of undue payments61

This issue was also addressed in the recommendations of Mr
Antonio Vitorino resulting from the mediation on private
copying and reprography levies.

.

Have you experienced a situation where a cross-border
transaction resulted in undue levy payments, or duplicate
payments of the same levy, or other obstacles to the free
movement of goods or services?

 YES – Please specify the type of transaction and indicate
the percentage of the undue payments. Please also indicate how
a priori exemption and/or ex post reimbursement schemes could
help to remedy the situation.

En France, les cas de paiement indu ou de double paiement sont
prévus par les dispositions légales : - il existe un système de
remboursement de la rémunération lorsque le support est exporté
hors du territoire. - un remboursement de la rémunération est
également effectué pour les supports importés puis mis en
circulation sur le territoire français et ensuite exportés hors
du territoire. COPIE FRANCE rembourse alors la rémunération sur
présentation des justificatifs attestant de l'exportation
effective des supports.

 NO – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO OPINION

What percentage of products subject to a levy is sold to persons
other than natural persons for purposes clearly unrelated to
private copying? Do any of thosetransactions result in undue
payments? Please explain in detail the example you provide
(type of products, type of transaction, stakeholders, etc.).

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Where such undue payments arise, what percentage of trade do
they affect? To what extent could a priori exemptions and/or ex
post reimbursement schemes existing in some Member States help
to remedy the situation?

[Open question]

En France, l’article L 311-8 du Code de la Propriété
Intellectuelle prévoit les cas dans lesquels la rémunération
pour copie privée n’est pas due. Le mécanisme étant
automatique, il n’y a pas de paiement indu.

If you have identified specific problems with the current
functioning of the levysystem, how would these problems best be
solved?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Fair remuneration of authors and performers

The EU copyright acquis recognises for authors and performers a
numberof exclusive rights and, in the case of performers whose
performances are fixed in phonograms, remuneration rights.
There are few provisions in the EU copyright law governing
thetransferof rights from authors or performers to producers62

See e.g. Directive 92/100/EEC, Art.2(4)-(7).

or determining who the owner of the rights is when the work or
other subject matter is created in the context of an employment
contract63

See e.g. Art. 2.3. of Directive 2009/24/EC, Art. 4 of Directive
96/9/EC.

. This is an area that has been traditionally left for Member
States to regulate and there are significant differences in
regulatory approaches. Substantial differences also exist
between different sectors of the creative industries.

Concerns continue to be raised thatauthors and performers are
not adequately remunerated, in particular but not solely, as
regards online exploitation. Many consider that the economic
benefit of new forms of exploitation is not being fairly shared
along the whole value chain. Another commonly raised issue
concerns contractual practices, negotiation mechanisms,
presumptions of transfer of rights, buy-out clauses and the
lack of possibility to terminate contracts. Some stakeholders
are of the opinion that rules at national level do not suffice
to improve their situation and that action at EU level is
necessary.

[In particular if you are an author/performer:] What is the best
mechanism (or combination of mechanisms) to ensure that you
receive an adequate remuneration for the exploitation ofyour
works and performances?

[Open question]

Les auteurs restent attachés au principe de la rémunération
proportionnelle à l’exploitation de l’œuvre qui reconnait la
popularité d'une oeuvre. Il est nécessaire cependant que la
volumétrie (ventes effectives) d'oeuvres puissent être mieux
contrôlées. Les auteurs ont dans ce domaine peut de recours, ce
qui rend le marché très opaque. La connaissance de la volumétrie
fine par segment du marché serait très utile. Le paiement des
droits dans les délais, quelquesoit le système de rémunération
de l'oeuvre reste aussi un énorme problème. Les éditeurs qui ne
respectent pas leurs engagements contractuels devraient être
fortement pénalisés. Le système des sanctions est faible et le
paiement des droits trop souvent unproblème. Il semble que peu
de progrès aient été fait dans ce domaine en 200 ans, ce qui
constitue un frein à l'incitation de la création. Le non
paiement des droits avec des retards de plus de 8 mois (par
exemple) devrait entrainer automatiquement pour l'auteur le
droit de résilier son contrat d'édition avec son éditeur, sans
préjudice du paiement des arriérés et d'une pénalité dissuasive
pour l'éditeur. Il est anormal que des éditeurs jouent sur la
difficulté pour un auteur de traduire son éditeur en justice
compte tenu du niveau des droits versé. Un fonds de garantie
des auteurs devrait être constitué à cet effet au niveau
européen. Le système d’un minimum garanti par acquisition de
l’œuvre ou par accès à l’œuvre constituerait le meilleur
moyen de rémunérer l’auteur de manière juste et équitable,
notamment dans l’univers numérique où l’assiette de
rémunération aura tendance à très largement diminuer. De
même, le système du forfait, s’il est suffisamment et
clairement encadré (durée, type et nombre d'usages,
renouvellement ou prolongation…), pourrait être utilisé afin de
rémunérer les auteurs dans le cas d’exploitations numériques
multiples ou, plus largement, de modèles de diffusion pour
lesquels il est impossible d’appliquer un pourcentage sur le
prix. Dans de nombreux cas, seule la gestion collective permet
également une juste rémunération des auteurs (droit de prêt,
copie privée numérique, livres indisponibles, reprographie) et
une gestion appropriée des droits. Il nous semble essentiel,
notamment dans ledomaine du numérique, d'affirmer le principe
général selon lequel une rémunération juste et équitable doit
être systématiquement versée aux auteurs sur tous les revenus
issus de la commercialisation ou de la diffusion de leurs
œuvres, directe ou indirecte(vente à l'unité, abonnements,
publicité, portails...).

Is there a need to act at the EU level (for instance to prohibit
certain clauses in contracts)?

YES – Please explain

L’objectif d’une intervention législative au niveau européen
consisterait àprohiber toute clause abusive et notamment à
interdire les clauses de contrats qui excluent certaines
assiettes de la rémunération de l’auteur (publicité...). De
même, des principes pourraient être établis pour assurer la
régularité, la transparence et l'exactitude des comptes de
l’éditeur au profit de l’auteur. Des dispositions pourraient
également prévoir de faciliter les possibilités de sorties du
contrat pour l'auteur en cas de non exploitation des droits par
l’éditeur. Il serait par ailleurs utile de lever la confusion
entre la durée des droits et la durée de cession dans un
contrat. La durée de cession devrait être obligatoirement
déterminée, c'est-à-dire limitée dans le temps. Par exemple,
la loi pourrait prévoir que les contrats d’édition ne
puissentpas être conclus pour une durée supérieure à 5 ans, en
laissant le choix de recourir à la reconduction tacite. Cette
disposition serait en tout cas justifiée en matière d'édition
numérique. À défaut, il convient d'encadrer plus fortement les
cessions, comme cela a été proposé en France par l'accord-cadre
du 21 mars 2013 entre les auteurs et les éditeurs.

 NO – Please explain why

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO OPINION

If you consider that the currentrules are not effective, what
would you suggest to address the shortcomings you identify?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Respect for rights

Directive 2004/48/EE64

Directive 2004/48/EC of theEuropean Parliament and of the
Council of 29 April 2004 on the enforcement of intellectual
property rights.

provides for a harmonised framework for the civil enforcement of
intellectual property rights, including copyright and related
rights. The Commission has consulted broadly on this text65

You will find more information on the following
website:http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/iprenforcement/directive/index_en.htm

. Concerns have been raised as to whether some of its provisions
are still fit to ensure a proper respect for copyright in the
digital age. On the one hand, the current measures seem to be
insufficient to deal with the new challenges brought by the
dissemination of digital content on the internet; on the other
hand, there are concerns about the current balance between
enforcement of copyright and the protection of fundamental
rights, in particular the right for a private life and data
protection. While it cannot be contested that enforcement
measures should always be available in case of infringement of
copyright, measures could be proposed to strengthen respect for
copyright when the infringed content is used for a commercial
purpose66

For example when the infringing content is offered on a website
which gets advertising revenues that depend on the volume of
traffic.

. One means to do this could be to clarify the role of
intermediaries in the IP infrastructure67

This clarification should not affect the liability regime of
intermediary service providers established by Directive
2000/31/EC on electronic commerce, which will remain unchanged.

. At the same time, there could be clarification of the
safeguards for respect of private life and data protectionfor
private users.

Should the civil enforcement system in the EU be rendered more
efficient for infringements of copyright committed with a
commercial purpose?

YES – Please explain

Favorable à un renforcement de sanctions véritablement
dissuasives surdes infractions au droit d’auteur, notamment
dans le cadre de diffusions illégales et répétées d’œuvres sur
Internet poursuivant un objectif commercial direct ou indirect.

 NO – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO OPINION

In particular, is the current legal framework clear enough to
allow for sufficient involvement of intermediaries (such as
Internet service providers, advertising brokers, payment
service providers, domain name registrars,etc.) in inhibiting
online copyright infringements with a commercial purpose? If
not, what measures would be useful to foster the cooperation of
intermediaries?

[Open question]

Non, le cadre juridique actuel n’est pas satisfaisant, notamment
sur la question de la responsabilité des fournisseurs d’accès à
Internet, des intermédiaires techniques et des hébergeurs. La
directive sur le commerce électronique pourrait utilement être
révisée dans ce sens.

Does the current civil enforcement framework ensure thatthe
right balance is achieved between the right to have one’s
copyright respected and other rights such as the protection of
private life and protection of personal data?

YES – Please explain

Le respect du droit d’auteur est garanti par des moyens légaux
appropriés qui ne remettent pas en cause les principes
fondamentaux des droits de la personnalité. Le respect de la
vie privée nous semble plutôt menacé par la « surveillance de
masse » sur Internet, contre laquelle, d’ailleurs, les
écrivains ont récemment lancé une pétition réclamant une «
Charte internationale des droits numériques » sous l’égide de
l’ONU.

 NO – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO OPINION

A single EU Copyright Title

Theidea of establishing a unified EU Copyright Title has been
present in the copyright debate for quite some time now,
although views as to the merits and the feasibility of such an
objective are divided. A unified EU Copyright Title would
totally harmonise the area of copyright law in the EU and
replace national laws. There would then be a single EU title
instead of a bundle of national rights. Some see this as the
only manner in which a truly Single Market for content
protected by copyright can be ensured, while others believe
that the same objective can better be achieved by establishing
a higher level of harmonisation while allowing for a certain
degree of flexibility and specificity in Member States’ legal
systems.

Should the EU pursue the establishmentof a single EU Copyright
Title, as a means of establishing a consistent framework for
rights and exceptions to copyright across the EU, as well as a
single framework for enforcement?

 YES

 NO

 NO OPINION

Should this be the next step in the developmentof copyright in
the EU? Does the current level of difference among the Member
State legislation mean that this is a longer term project?

[Open question]

Un cadre européen pragmatique, souple et facile à manipuler pour
les auteurs serait le bienvenu. Parcontre, si cela doit se
traduire par un renforcement de la complexité des régimes
actuels, mieux vaut s'abstenir. C'est une affaire de bon sens,
si on veut véritablement inciter la création artistique à
s'épanouir. Pratiquement cela doit se traduire par uncadre
contractuel facile a comprendre et à utiliser pour les auteurs
qui n'ont pas forcément les moyens d'avoir recours à un cabinet
d'avocat. Un service en ligne permettant de les notariser
pourrait être utile.

Other issues

The above questionnaire aimsto provide a comprehensive
consultation on the most important matters relating to the
current EU legal framework for copyright. Should any important
matters have been omitted, we would appreciate if you could
bring them to our attention, so they can be properly addressed
in the future.

Are there any other important matters related to the EU legal
framework for copyright? Please explain and indicate how such
matters should be addressed.

[Open question]

Dans la configuration du marché unique multipays, j’ajouterais
que : 1. dans le cas de la rémunération proportionnelle (qui
reste le système préféré), la publication accessible en ligne
des volumes vendus selon un système certifié (ex. par Véritas
ou Tüv) serait le bienvenu, car aujourd’hui les auteurs
restentsoumis à un système purement déclaratif de la part des
éditeurs sans pouvoir de vérification des volumes vendus et de
maigres recours sur cette question, ce n’est pas satisfaisant.
2. le paiement régulier et dans les délais des droits dus
devraient fairepartie des obligations absolues des maisons
d’édition sous peine de sanctions dissuasives. Il est
anormal qu’un auteur doive envoyer 15 lettres pour recevoir ses
droits, l’éditeur comptant alors sur l’épuisement de l’auteur
pour ne rien faire ! 3. les conditions de rupture en cas de non
règlement des droits d’auteur dus par l’éditeur devraient être
mieux encadrés. Par exemple, 8 à 12 mois de retard dans le
versement des droits pourraient automatiquement conduire
l’auteur à disposer du choix de reprendre saliberté par
lettre AR, sans préjudice du paiement des droits dus et de
pénalités de retard dissuasives pour l’éditeur.

