


Public Consultation

on the review of the EU copyright rules

Please identify yourself:

Name:

In the interests of transparency,organisations (including, for
example, NGOs, trade associations and commercial enterprises)
are invited to provide the public with relevant information
about themselves by registering in the Interest Representative
Register and subscribing to its Code of Conduct.

If you are a Registered organisation, please indicate your
Register ID number below. Your contribution will then be
considered as representing the views of your organisation.

Not registered

If your organisation is not registered, you have the opportunity
toregister now. Responses from organisations not registered will
be published separately.

If you would like to submit your reply on an anonymous basis
please indicateit belowby underlining the following answer:

Yes, I would like to submit my reply on an anonymous basis

Type of respondent(Pleaseunderlinethe appropriate):

End user/consumer(e.g. internet user, reader, subscriber to
music or audiovisual service,researcher, student) OR
Representative of end users/consumers

for the purposes of this questionnaire normally referred to
in questions as"end users/consumers"

Institutional user(e.g. school, university, research centre,
library, archive) OR Representative of institutional users

for the purposes of this questionnaire normally referred to
in questions as"institutional users"

Author/Performer OR Representative of authors/performers

Publisher/Producer/Broadcaster OR Representative of
publishers/producers/broadcasters

the two above categoriesare,for the purposes of this
questionnaire, normally referred to in questions as"right
holders"

Intermediary/Distributor/Other service provider(e.g. online
music or audiovisual service, games platform, social media,
search engine, ICT industry)OR Representative of
intermediaries/distributors/other service providers

for the purposes of this questionnaire normally referred to
in questions as"service providers"

Collective Management Organisation

Publicauthority

Member State

Other(Please explain):

Discount-Licensing Limited is a lawful reseller of used software
within the European Union, based in the United Kingdom.
Discount-Licensing's core business is to identify disused
Microsoft 'Volume' softwarelicences ('Select' / 'Open' /
'Enterprise') from solvent and insolvent organisations (Private
and Public sector), which are then transferred to businesses who
are migrating or experiencing a licence shortfall.
Discount-Licensing provides proof of ownership for every
purchase and notifies Microsoft of the transfer.

Rights and the functioning of the Single Market

Why is it not possible to access many online content services
from anywhere in Europe?

[In particular if you are an end user/consumer:]Haveyou faced
problems when trying to access online services in an EU Member
State other than the one in which you live?

 YES - Please provide examples indicating the Member State,
the sector and the type of content concerned (e.g. premium
content such ascertain films and TV series, audio-visual
content in general, music, e-books, magazines, journals and
newspapers, games, applications and other software)

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO

XNO OPINION

[Inparticular if you are a service provider:]Have you faced
problems when seeking to provide online services across borders
in the EU?

 YES - Please explain whether such problems, in your
experience, are related to copyright or to other issues (e.g.
business decisions relating to the cost of providing services
across borders, compliance with other laws such as consumer
protection)? Please provide examples indicating the Member
State, the sector and the type of content concerned (e.g.
premium content such ascertain films and TV series,
audio-visual content in general, music, e-books, magazines,
journals and newspapers, games, applications and other
software).

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO

XNO OPINION

[In particular if you are a right holder or a collective
management organisation:]How often are you asked to grant
multi-territorial licences? Please indicate, if possible, the
number of requests per year and provide examples indicating the
Member State, the sector and the type of content concerned.

[Open question]

Discount Licensing is not a right holder or a collective
management organisation.

If you have identified problems in the answers to any of the
questions above – what would be the best way totackle them?

[Open question]

Discount Licensing is not a right holder or a collective
management organisation.

[In particular if you are a right holder or a collective
management organisation:]Are there reasons why, even in cases
where you hold allthe necessary rights for all the territories
in question, you would still find it necessary or justified to
impose territorial restrictions on a service provider (in
order, for instance, to ensure that access to certain content
is not possible in certain European countries)?

 YES – Please explain by giving examples

 NO

XNO OPINION - Discount Licensing is not a right holder or a
collective management organisation.

[In particular if you are e.g. a broadcaster or a service
provider:]Are there reasons why, even in cases where you have
acquired all the necessary rights for all the territories in
question, you would still find it necessary or justified to
impose territorial restrictions on the service recipient (in
order for instance, to redirect the consumer to a different
website than the one he is trying to access)?

 YES – Please explain by giving examples

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO

XNO OPINION – Discount Licensing is not a broadcaster or service
provider.

Do you think that further measures (legislative or
non-legislative, including market-led solutions) are needed at
EU level to increase the cross-border availability of content
services in the Single Market, while ensuring an adequate level
of protection for right holders?

 YES – Please explain

The common market would undoubtedly be enhanced by a greater
degree of harmonisation. See for example the case of joined
cases C-403/08 Football Association Premier League Ltd and
Others v QC Leisure andOthers and C-429/08 Karen Murphy v Media
Protection Services Ltd

(see
http://curia.europa.eu/juris/celex.jsf?celex=62008CJ0403&lang1=en&type=NOT&ancre=)
concerning, in part the implementation of Directive 98/84/EC
(the “Conditional Access Directive”). In this case, different
(copyright) rights gave rise to different results.

 NO – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO OPINION

Is there a need for more clarity as regards the scope of what
needs to be authorised (or not) in digital transmissions?

Is the scope of the “making available” right in cross-border
situations – i.e. whencontent is disseminated across borders –
sufficiently clear?

 YES

 NO – Please explain how this could be clarified and what
type of clarification would be required (e.g. as in "targeting"
approach explained above, as in "country of origin" approach)

The current legislation imposes restrictions on European
companies that are safely ignored by foreign based companies,
therefore greatly disadvantaging European companies. In
particular if a foreign company (from outside the European
Union) targets individuals in a given European Union country
there is often no sanction. It is therefore vital that
legislation is framed in such a way as to create a level
playing field. A model of how this could be effectively done is
the proposed new European Data Protection Regulation.

 NO OPINION

[In particular if you are a right holder:]Could a clarification
of the territorial scope of the “making available” right have
an effect on the recognition of your rights (e.g. whether you
are considered to be an author ornot, whether you are
considered to have transferred your rights or not), on your
remuneration, or on the enforcement of rights (including the
availability of injunctive relief)?

 YES – Please explain how such potential effects could be
addressed

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO

XNO OPINION

[In particular if you a service provider or a right holder:]Does
the application of two rights to a single act of economic
exploitation in the online environment (e.g.a download) create
problems for you?

 YES – Please explain what type of measures would be needed
in order to address such problems (e.g. facilitation of joint
licences when the rights are in different hands, legislation to
achieve the "bundling ofrights")

There is logic in trying to bundle rights so that a uniform
licensing regime can apply, in that it reduces the propensity
of orphan works. However it may be difficult to achieve without
alienating the existing rights of those having a
legitimateprotected right in a work.

 NO

 NO OPINION

Should the provision of a hyperlink leading to a work or other
subject matter protected under copyright, either in general or
under specific circumstances, be subject to the authorisation
of the rightholder?

 YES – Please explain whether you consider this to be the
case in general, or under specific circumstances, and why

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO – Please explain whether you consider this to be the case
in general, or under specific circumstances, and why (e.g.
because it does not amount to an act of communication to the
public – or to a new public, or because it should be covered by
a copyright exception)

The mere provision of information should not, in general, amount
to copyright infringement. There is also great difficulty in
establishing what is a “new public” in accordance with the
recent decided cases, most notably that of Svensson -v-
Retriever Sverige AB (C-466/12) which, since it was decided on
13th February 2014, was subsequent to the preparation of this
Public Consultation. The current definition, upheld in that
case is that a new public is one “not in the contemplation of
the copyright owner who has originally made the copyright work
available”. This definition is unsatisfactory, since an issue
of this importance should have such a high subjective element.

 NO OPINION

Should the viewing of a web-page where this implies the
temporary reproduction of a work or other subject
matterprotected under copyright on the screen and in the cache
memory of the user’s computer, either in general or under
specific circumstances, be subject to the authorisation of the
rightholder?

 YES – Please explain whether you consider this to be the
casein general, or under specific circumstances, and why

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO – Please explain whether you consider this to be the case
in general, or under specific circumstances, and why (e.g.
because it is or should be covered by a copyright exception)

At the moment, this activity is currently mostly exempted by
Articles 12 and 13 of the E-Commerce Directive: 2000/31/EC of 8
June 2000. This should continue. However, there is merit in
revisiting whether a more generous form of wording should be
allowed for such activity in a personal sphere than on a
commercial sphere. In addition, it is vital that the
legislation is framed in such a way as to create a level
playing field. The current legislationimposes restrictions on
European companies that are safely ignored by foreign based
companies, therefore greatly disadvantaging European companies.
A model of how this could be effectively done is the proposed
new European Data Protection Regulation.

NO OPINION

[In particular if you are an end user/consumer:]Have you faced
restrictions when trying to resell digital files that you have
purchased (e.g. mp3 file, e-book)?

 YES – Please explain by giving examples

Software licensors consistentlyattempt to evade the provisions
of Directive 2001/29/EC of 22 May 2001 on the harmonisation of
certain aspects of copyright and related rights in the
information society (OJ 2001 L 167, p. 10) (the “European
Software Directive”). They do so by making no attempt to inform
consumers or businesses of the lawfulness of the transfer of
used software. Indeed most software licences continue to (i)
state that those licences are personal and (ii) if they do
permit a transfer, attempt to impose further restrictionson
that transfer, for example by purporting to require
notification in a particular manner to the original software
licensor.

This practice is used by licensors of all sizes. Examples of
such licences from a large supplier can be found in the case
ofAdobe athttp://www.adobe.com/legal/licenses-terms.html.

Other issues are also relevant to “ebooks”. It is fundamentally
wrong to deceive consumers into believing that they have
“bought” acopy of a book, when in fact this right can be
taken away from them without compensation or adequate redress.
This is the case in the European Union following the decision
in the United States case of Gawronski v. Amazon.com, No.
2:09-cv-01084-JCC (W.D.Wash. Jul. 31, 2009).

 NO

 NO OPINION

[In particular if you are a right holder or a service provider:]
What would be the consequences of providing a legal framework
enabling the resale of previously purchased digital content?
Please specify per market(type of content) concerned.

[Open question]

As has been stated, a proper legal framework preventing software
licensors from trying to evade the consequences of the European
Software Directive would benefit licensees considerably.

An effective market,which was not obfuscated by software
licensors would undoubtedly encourage competition. It would
increase the amount of used software in circulation thereby
driving down prices in the interests of both business and
consumer licensees.

Registration of works and other subject matter – is it a good
idea?

Would the creation of a registration system at EU level help in
the identification and licensing of works and other subject
matter?

XYES

 NO

 NO OPINION

What would be the possible advantages of sucha system?

[Open question]

It would avoid the possibility of orphaned works. Although
orphaned works are not common, when they do arise they can give
rise to fundamental issues.

What would be the possible disadvantages of such a system?

[Open question]

The cost and the accompanying bureaucracy.

What incentives for registration by rightholders could be
envisaged?

[Open question]

As is the case in the United States, an incentive based on the
costs recoverable in litigation could be considered. Thereare
many ways in which this could be done. It is suggested that the
incentive does not need to be large and that some discretion
should still be left to a court to determine on a case-by-case
basis.

How to improve the use and interoperability ofidentifiers

What should be the role of the EU in promoting the adoption
of identifiers in the content sector, and in promoting the
development and interoperability of rights ownership and
permissions databases?

[Open question]

No comment given.

Term of protection – is it appropriate?

Are the current terms of copyright protection still appropriate
in the digital environment?

 YES – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO – Please explain if theyshould be longer or shorter

The current term of copyright protection for computer software
is fundamentally too long. We have inherited a situation in
which computer software is protected for the life of the author
plus 70 years solely by historic anomaly. Computer software was
“squeezed” into historic copyright protection in the 1980s
simply because to develop a sui generis right would have taken
too long. This should be rectified as soon as possible. A
“copyright” lifetime for software of perhaps 20 years is
appropriate. In the last 10 years there should be a right to
modify the work on payment of an appropriate royalty.

A related issue is the sanctions for breach of copyright. While
some countries have introduced criminal sanctions for breach of
copyright, their extension to software can be draconian. This is
because a “simple” dispute surrounding the interpretation and
extent of a licence can become a criminal matter. See the
English case of Thames & Hudson v Design and Artists Copyright
SocietyLimited [1995] FSR 153. The criminal law should be
limitedto the deliberate infringement of copyright, and a
copyright owner should not be entitled to bring criminal
proceedings in those situations where a licensee has a
legitimate alternative view of an actual or alleged licence.

 NO OPINION

Limitations and exceptions in the Single Market

Are there problems arising from the fact that most limitations
and exceptions provided in the EU copyright directives are
optional for the Member States?

 YES –Please explain by referring to specific cases

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO OPINION

Should some/all ofthe exceptions be made mandatory and, if so,
is there a need for a higher level of harmonisation of such
exceptions?

 YES – Please explain by referring to specific cases

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO –Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO OPINION

Should any new limitations and exceptions be added to or removed
from the existing catalogue?Please explain by referring to
specific cases.

[Openquestion]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Independently from the questions above, is there a need to
provide for a greater degree of flexibility in the EU
regulatory framework for limitations and exceptions?

YES – Please explain why

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO – Please explain why

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO OPINION

If yes, what would be the bestapproach to provide for
flexibility? (e.g. interpretation by national courts and the
ECJ, periodic revisions of the directives, interpretations by
the Commission, built-in flexibility, e.g. in the form of a
fair-use or fair dealing provision / open norm, etc.)? Please
explain indicating what would be the relative advantages and
disadvantages of such an approach as well as its possible
effects on the functioning of the Internal Market.

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Does the territoriality of limitations and exceptions, in your
experience, constitute a problem?

 YES – Please explain why and specify which exceptions you
are referring to

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO – Please explain why and specify which exceptions you are
referring to

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO OPINION

In the event that limitations and exceptions established at
national levelwere to have cross-border effect, how should the
question of “fair compensation” be addressed, when such
compensation is part of the exception? (e.g. who pays whom,
where?)

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Access to content in libraries and archives

(a)[In particular if you are an institutional user:]Have you
experienced specific problems when trying to use an exception
to preserve and archive specific works or other subject matter
in yourcollection?

(b)[In particular if you are a right holder:]Have you
experienced problems with the use by libraries, educational
establishments, museum or archives of the preservation
exception?

 YES – Please explain, by Member State, sector, and the
typeof use in question.

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO

 NO OPINION

If there are problems, how would they best be solved?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

If your view is that a legislative solution is needed, what
would be its main elements? Which activities of the beneficiary
institutions should be covered and under which conditions?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

If your view is that a different solution is needed, what would
it be?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

(a)[Inparticular if you are an institutional user:]Have you
experienced specific problems when trying to negotiate
agreements with rights holders that enable you to provide
remote access, including across borders, to your collections
(or parts thereof) for purposes of research and private study?

(b)[In particular if you are an end user/consumer:]Have you
experienced specific problems when trying to consult, including
across borders, works and other subject-matter held in the
collections of institutions suchas universities and national
libraries when you are not on the premises of the institutions
in question?

(c)[In particular if you are aright holder:]Have you negotiated
agreements with institutional users that enable those
institutions to provide remoteaccess, including across borders,
to the works or other subject-matter in their collections, for
purposes of research and private study?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

If there are problems,how would they best be solved?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

If your view is that a legislative solution is needed, what
would be its main elements? Which activities of the
beneficiaryinstitutions should be covered and under which
conditions?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

If your view is that a different solution is needed, what would
it be?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

(a)[In particular if you are alibrary:]Have you experienced
specific problems when trying to negotiate agreements to enable
the electronic lending (e-lending), including acrossborders, of
books or other materials held in your collection?

(b)[In particular if you are an end user/consumer:]Have you
experienced specific problems when trying to borrow books or
other materials electronically (e-lending), including across
borders,from institutions such as public libraries?

(c)[In particular if you are aright holder:]Have you negotiated
agreements with libraries to enable them to lend books or other
materials electronically, including across borders?

 YES – Please explain withspecific examples

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO

 NO OPINION

If there are problems, how would they best be solved?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

The following two questions are relevant both to this point (n°
3) and the previous one (n° 2).

[In particular if you are an institutional user:]What
differences do you see in the management of physical and
onlinecollections, including providing access to your
subscribers? What problems have you encountered?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

[In particular if you are a right holder:]What difference do
yousee between libraries’ traditional activities such as
on-premises consultation or public lending and activities such
as off-premises (online, at a distance) consultation and
e-lending? What problems have you encountered?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

[In particular if you are an institutional user,engaging or
wanting to engage in mass digitisation projects, a right
holder, a collective management organisation:]Would it be
necessary in yourcountry to enact legislation to ensure that
the results of the 2011 MoU (i.e. the agreements concluded
between libraries and collecting societies) have a cross-border
effect so that out of commerce works can be accessed across the
EU?

 YES – Please explain why and how it could best be achieved

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO OPINION

Would it be necessary to develop mechanisms, beyond those
already agreed for other types of content (e.g. for audio- or
audio-visual collections, broadcasters’ archives)?

 YES – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO – Pleaseexplain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO OPINION

Teaching

(a)[In particular if you are an end user/consumer or an
institutional user:]Have you experienced specific problems when
trying to use works orother subject-matter for illustration for
teaching, including across borders?

(b)[In particular if you are a right holder:]Have you
experienced specific problems resulting from the way in which
works or other subject-matter are used for illustration
forteaching, including across borders?

 YES – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO

 NO OPINION

If there are problems, how would they best be solved?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

What mechanisms exist in the market place to facilitate the use
of content for illustration for teaching purposes? How
successful are they?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

If your view is that a legislative solution is needed, what
would be its main elements? Which activities of the beneficiary
institutions should be covered and under what conditions?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

If your view is that a different solution is needed, what would
it be?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Research

(a)[In particular if you are an end user/consumer or an
institutional user:]Have you experienced specific problems when
trying to use works or other subject matter in the context of
researchprojects/activities, including across borders?

(b)[In particular if you are a right holder:]Have you
experienced specific problems resulting from the way in which
works or other subject-matter are used in the context of
research projects/activities, including across borders?

 YES – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO

 NO OPINION

If there are problems, how would they best be solved?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

What mechanisms exist in the Member States to facilitate the use
of content for research purposes? How successful are they?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Disabilities

(a)[In particular if you are a person with a disability or an
organisation representing persons with disabilities:]Have you
experienced problems with accessibility to content, including
across borders, arising from Member States’ implementation of
this exception?

(b)[In particular if you are an organisation providing services
for persons with disabilities:]Have you experienced problems
when distributing/communicating works published in special
formats across the EU?

(c)[In particular if you are a right holder:]Have you
experienced specific problems resulting from the application of
limitations or exceptions allowing for the
distribution/communication of works published in special
formats, including across borders?

 YES – Please explain by giving examples

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO

 NO OPINION

If there are problems, what could be done to improve
accessibility?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

What mechanisms exist in the market place to facilitate
accessibility to content? How successful are they?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Text and datamining

(a)[In particular if you are an end user/consumer or an
institutional user:]Have you experienced obstacles, linked to
copyright, when trying to use text or data mining methods,
including across borders?

(b)[In particular if you are a service provider:]Have you
experienced obstacles, linked to copyright, when providing
services based on text or data mining methods, including across
borders?

(c)[In particular if you are a right holder:]Have you
experienced specific problems resulting from the use of text
and data mining in relation to copyright protected content,
including across borders?

 YES – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO OPINION

If there are problems, how would they best be solved?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

If your view is that a legislative solution is needed,what would
be its main elements? Which activities should be covered and
under what conditions?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

If your view is that a different solution is needed, what would
itbe?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Are there other issues, unrelated to copyright, that constitute
barriers to the use of text or data mining methods?

[Open question]……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

User-generated content

(a)[In particular if you are an end user/consumer:]Have you
experienced problems when trying to use pre-existing works or
other subject matter to disseminate new content on the
Internet, including across borders?

(b)[In particular if you are a service provider:]Have you
experienced problems when users publish/disseminate new content
based on the pre-existing works or other subject-matter through
your service, including across borders?

(c)[In particular if you are a right holder:]Have you
experienced problems resulting from the way the users are using
pre-existing works or other subject-matter to disseminate new
content on the Internet, including acrossborders?

 YES – Please explain by giving examples

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO

 NO OPINION

(a)[In particular if you are an end user/consumer or a right
holder:]Have you experienced problems when trying to ensure
that the work you have created (on the basis of pre-existing
works) is properly identified for online use? Are proprietary
systems sufficient in this context?

(b)[In particular if you are a service provider:]Do you provide
possibilities forusers that are publishing/disseminating the
works they have created (on the basis of pre-existing works)
through your service to properly identify these works for
online use?

 YES – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO OPINION

(a)[In particular if you are an end user/consumer or a right
holder):]Have you experienced problems when trying to be
remunerated for the use of the work you have created (on the
basis of pre-existing works)?

(b)[In particular if you are a service provider:]Do you provide
remuneration schemes for users publishing/disseminating the
works they have created (on the basis of pre-existing works)
through your service?

 YES – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO OPINION

Ifthere are problems, how would they best be solved?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

If your view is that a legislative solution is needed, what
would be its main elements? Which activities shouldbe covered
and under what conditions?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

If your view is that a different solution is needed, what would
it be?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Private copying and reprography

In your view, is there a need to clarify at the EU level the
scope and application of the private copying and reprography
exceptions in the digital environment?

 YES – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO OPINION

Should digital copies made by end users for private purposes in
thecontext of a service that has been licensed by rightholders,
and where the harm to the rightholder is minimal, be subject to
private copying levies?

 YES – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO –Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO OPINION

How would changes in levies with respect to the application to
online services (e.g. services based on cloud computing
allowing, for instance, usersto have copies on different
devices) impact the development and functioning of new business
models on the one hand and rightholders’ revenue on the other?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Wouldyou see an added value in making levies visible on the
invoices for products subject to levies?

 YES – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO OPINION

Have you experienced a situation where a cross-border
transaction resulted in undue levy payments, or duplicate
payments of the same levy, or other obstacles to the free
movement of goods or services?

 YES – Please specify the type of transaction and indicate
the percentage of the undue payments. Please also indicate how
a priori exemption and/or ex post reimbursement schemes could
help to remedy the situation.

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO OPINION

What percentage of products subject to a levy is sold to persons
other than natural persons for purposes clearlyunrelated to
private copying? Do any of those transactions result in undue
payments? Please explain in detail the example you provide
(type of products, type of transaction, stakeholders, etc.).

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Where such undue payments arise, what percentage of trade do
they affect? To what extent could a priori exemptions and/or ex
post reimbursement schemes existing in some Member States help
to remedy the situation?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

If you have identified specific problems with the current
functioning of the levy system, how would these problems best
be solved?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Fair remuneration of authors and performers

[In particular if you are an author/performer:] What is the best
mechanism (or combination of mechanisms) to ensure that you
receive anadequate remuneration for the exploitation of your
works and performances?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Is there a need to act at the EU level (for instance to prohibit
certain clauses incontracts)?

 YES – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO – Please explain why

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO OPINION

If you consider that thecurrent rules are not effective, what
would you suggest to address the shortcomings you identify?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Respect for rights

Should the civil enforcement system in the EUbe rendered more
efficient for infringements of copyright committed with a
commercial purpose?

 YES – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO OPINION

In particular, is the current legal framework clear enough to
allow for sufficient involvement of intermediaries (such as
Internet service providers, advertising brokers, payment
service providers, domain name registrars, etc.) in inhibiting
online copyright infringements with a commercial purpose? If
not, what measures would be useful to foster the cooperation of
intermediaries?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Does the current civil enforcement framework ensure that the
right balance is achieved between the right to have one’s
copyright respected and other rights such as the protection of
private life and protection ofpersonal data?

 YES – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO OPINION

A single EU Copyright Title

Should the EU pursue the establishment of a single EU Copyright
Title, as a means of establishing a consistent framework for
rights and exceptions to copyright across the EU, as well as a
single framework for enforcement?

 YES

 NO

 NO OPINION

Shouldthis be the next step in the development of copyright in
the EU? Does the current level of difference among the Member
State legislation mean that this is a longer term project?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Other issues

Are there any other important matters related to the EU legal
framework for copyright? Please explain and indicate how such
matters should be addressed.

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

