


Public Consultation

on the review of the EU copyright rules

Contents

I.  Introduction  2

A.  Context ofthe consultation  2

B.  How to submit replies to this questionnaire  3

C.  Confidentiality  3

II.  Rights and the functioning of the Single Market  7

A.  Why is it not possible to access many online content
services from anywhere in Europe?  7

B.  Is there a need for more clarity as regards the scope of
what needs to be authorised (or not) in digital transmissions?
10

1.  The act of “making available”  10

2.  Two rights involved in a single act of exploitation  11

3.  Linking and browsing  12

4.  Download to own digital content  13

C.  Registration of works and other subject matter – is it a
good idea?  14

D.  How to improve the use and interoperability ofidentifiers
15

E.  Term of protection – is it appropriate?  15

III.  Limitations and exceptions in the Single Market  16

A.  Access to content in libraries andarchives  19

1.  Preservation and archiving  19

2.  Off-premises access to library collections  20

3.  E – lending  21

4.  Massdigitisation  22

B.  Teaching  23

C.  Research  25

D.  Disabilities  25

E.  Text and data mining  27

F.  User-generated content  28

IV.  Private copying and reprography  31

V.  Fair remuneration of authors and performers  33

VI.  Respect for rights  34

VII.  A single EU Copyright Title  36

VIII.  Other issues  36

Introduction

Context of the consultation

Over the last two decades, digital technology and the Internet
have reshaped the ways in which content iscreated, distributed,
and accessed. New opportunities have materialised for those that
create and produce content (e.g. a film, a novel, a song), for
new and existing distribution platforms, for institutions such
as libraries, for activities such as research and for citizens
who now expect to be able to access content – for information,
education or entertainment purposes – regardless of
geographical borders.

This new environment also presents challenges. One of them is
for the market to continue to adaptto new forms of distribution
and use. Another one is for the legislator to ensure that the
system of rights, limitations to rights and enforcement remains
appropriate and is adapted to the new environment. This
consultation focuses on the second of these challenges:
ensuring that the EU copyright regulatory framework stays fit
for purpose in the digital environment to support creation and
innovation, tap the full potential of the Single Market, foster
growth and investment in our economy and promote cultural
diversity.

In its "Communication on Content in the Digital Single Market"1

COM (2012)789 final, 18/12/2012.

the Commission set out two parallel tracks of action:on the one
hand, to complete its on-going effort to review and to
modernise the EU copyright legislative framework2

As announced in the Intellectual Property Strategy ' A single
market for Intellectual Property Rights: COM (2011)287 final,
24/05/2011.

3

"Based on market studies and impact assessment and legal
drafting work"as announced inthe Communication (2012)789.

with a view to a decision in 2014 on whether to table
legislative reform proposals, andon the other, to facilitate
practical industry-led solutions through the stakeholder
dialogue "Licences for Europe" on issues on which rapid
progress was deemed necessary and possible.

The "Licences for Europe" process has been finalised now4

See the document “Licences for Europe – tem pledges to bring
more content
online”:http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/copyright/docs/licences-for-europe/131113_ten-pledges_en.pdf.

. The Commission welcomes the practical solutions stakeholders
have put forward in this context and will monitor their
progress. Pledges have been made by stakeholders in all four
Working Groups (cross border portability of services,
user-generated content, audiovisual and film heritage and text
and data mining). Taken together, the Commission expects these
pledgesto be a further step in making the user environment
easier in many different situations. The Commission also takes
note of the fact that two groups – user-generated content and
text and data mining – did not reach consensus among
participating stakeholders on either the problems to be
addressed or on the results. The discussions and results of
"Licences for Europe" will be also taken into account in the
context of the review of the legislative framework.

As part of the review process, the Commission is nowlaunching a
public consultation on issues identified in the Communication
on Content in the Digital Single Market, i.e.:"territoriality
in the Internal Market, harmonisation, limitations and
exceptions to copyright in the digital age; fragmentation of
the EU copyright market; and how to improve the effectiveness
and efficiency of enforcement while underpinning its legitimacy
in the wider context of copyright reform". As highlighted in the
October 2013 European CouncilConclusions5

EUCO 169/13, 24/25 October 2013.

"Providing digital services and content across the single market
requires the establishment of a copyright regime for the digital
age. The Commission will therefore complete its on-going review
of the EU copyright framework in spring 2014. It isimportant to
modernise Europe's copyright regime and facilitate licensing,
while ensuring a high level protection of intellectual property
rights and taking into account cultural diversity".

This consultation builds on previous consultations and public
hearings, in particular those on the "Green Paper on copyright
in the knowledge economy"6

COM(2008)
466/3,http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/copyright/copyright-infso/index_en.htm#maincontentSec2.

, the "Green Paper on the online distribution of audiovisual
works"7

COM(2011) 427
final,http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/consultations/2011/audiovisual_en.htm.

and "Content Online"8

http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/consultations/2009/content_online_en.htm.

. These consultations provided valuable feedback from
stakeholders on a number of questions, on issues as diverse as
the territoriality of copyright and possible ways to overcome
territoriality, exceptions related to the online dissemination
of knowledge, and rightholders’ remuneration, particularly in
the audiovisual sector. Views were expressed by stakeholders
representing all stages in the value chain, including right
holders, distributors, consumers, and academics. The questions
elicited widely diverging views on the best way to proceed. The
"Green Paper on Copyright in the Knowledge Economy" was followed
up by a Communication. The replies to the "Green Paper on the
online distribution of audiovisual works" have fed into
subsequent discussions on the Collective Rights Management
Directive and into the current review process.

How to submit replies to this questionnaire

You are kindly asked to send your repliesby 5 February 2014as a
word or pdf document to the following e-mail address of DG
Internal Market and
Services:markt-copyright-consultation@ec.europa.eu. Please note
that replies sent after that date will not be taken into
account.

This consultation is addressed to different categories of
stakeholders. To the extent possible, the questions indicate
the category/ies of respondents most likely to be concerned by
them (annotation in brackets, before the actual question).
Respondents should nevertheless feel free to reply to any/all
of the questions. Also, please note that, apart from the
question concerning the identification of the respondent, none
of the questions is obligatory. Replies containing answers only
to part of the questions will be also accepted.

You are requested to provide your answers directly within this
consultation document. For the “Yes/No/No opinion” questions
please put the selected answer inboldandunderlineit so it is
easy for us to see your selection.

In your answers to the questions, you are invited to refer to
the situation in EU Member States.You are also invited in
particular to indicate, where relevant, what would be the
impact of options you put forward in terms of costs,
opportunities and revenues.

The public consultation is available in English. Responses may,
however, be sent in any of the 24 official languages of the EU.

Confidentiality

The contributions received in this round of consultation as well
as a summary report presenting the responses in a statistical
and aggregated form will be published on the website of DG
MARKT.

Please note that all contributions received will be published
together with the identity of the contributor, unless the
contributor objects to the publication of their personal data
on the grounds that such publication would harm his or her
legitimate interests. Inthis case, the contribution will be
published in anonymous form upon the contributor's explicit
request. Otherwise the contribution will not be published nor
will its content be reflected in the summary report.

Pleaseread ourPrivacy statement.

Please identify yourself:

Name:

In the interests of transparency, organisations (including, for
example, NGOs,trade associations and commercial enterprises)
are invited to provide the public with relevant information
about themselves by registering in the Interest Representative
Register and subscribing to its Code of Conduct.

If you are a Registered organisation,please indicate your
Register ID number below. Your contribution will then be
considered as representing the views of your organisation.

…………………………………………………………………………………………………..

…………………………………………………………………………………………………..

If your organisation is not registered, you have the opportunity
toregisternow. Responses from organisations not registered will
be published separately.

If you would like to submit your reply on an anonymous basis
please indicate it belowby underlining the following answer:

Yes, I would like to submit my reply on an anonymous basis

Type of respondent(Pleaseunderlinethe appropriate):

End user/consumer(e.g. internet user, reader, subscriber to
music or audiovisual service, researcher, student) OR
Representative of end users/consumers

for the purposes of this questionnaire normally referred to
in questions as"end users/consumers"

Institutional user(e.g. school, university, research centre,
library,archive) OR Representative of institutional users

for the purposes of this questionnaire normally referred to
in questions as"institutional users"

Author/Performer OR Representative of authors/performers

Publisher/Producer/Broadcaster OR Representative of
publishers/producers/broadcasters

the two above categoriesare,for the purposes of this
questionnaire, normally referred to in questions as"right
holders"

Intermediary/Distributor/Other service provider(e.g. online
music or audiovisual service, games platform, social media,
search engine, ICT industry)OR Representative of
intermediaries/distributors/other service providers

for the purposes of this questionnaire normally referred to
in questions as"service providers"

Collective ManagementOrganisation

Public authority

Member State

Other(Please explain):

SiPA is Slovenian Publishers Association representing the
interests of the music publishing community in Slovenia.

Rights and the functioning of the Single Market

Why is it notpossible to access many online content services
from anywhere in Europe?[The territorial scope of the rights
involved in digital transmissions and the segmentation of the
market through licensing agreements]

Holders of copyright and related rights – e.g. writers, singers,
musicians - do not enjoy a single protection in the EU. Instead,
they are protected on the basis of a bundle of national rights
in each Member State. Those rights have been largely harmonised
by the existing EU Directives. However, differences remain and
the geographical scope of the rights is limited to the
territory of the Member State granting them. Copyright is thus
territorial in the sense that rights are acquired and enforced
on a country-by-country basis under national law9

Thisprinciple has been confirmed by the Court of justice on
several occasions.

.

The dissemination of copyright-protected content on the Internet
– e.g. by a music streaming service, or by an online e-book
seller – therefore requires, in principle, an authorisation for
each national territory in which the content is communicated to
the public. Rightholders are, of course, in a position to grant
a multi-territorial or pan-European licence, such that content
services can be provided in several Member States andacross
borders. A number of steps have been taken at EU level to
facilitate multi-territorial licences: the proposal for a
Directive on Collective Rights Management10

Proposal for a Directive of the European Parliament and of the
Council of 11 July 2012 on collective management of copyright
and related rights and multi-territorial licensing of rights in
musical works for online uses in the internal market, COM(2012)
372 final.

should significantly facilitate the delivery of
multi-territorial licences in musical works for online
services11

Collective Management Organisations play a significant role in
the management of online rights for musical works in contrast
to the situation where online rights are licensed directly by
right holders such as film orrecord producers or by newspaper
or book publishers.

; the structured stakeholder dialogue “Licences for Europe”12

You can find more information on the following website:
http://ec.europa.eu/licences-for-europe-dialogue/.

and market-led developments such as the on-going work in the
Linked Content Coalition13

You can find more information on the following
website:http://www.linkedcontentcoalition.org/.

.

"Licences for Europe" addressed in particular the specific issue
of cross-border portability, i.e. the ability of consumers
having subscribed to online services in their Member State to
keep accessing them when travelling temporarily to other Member
States. As a result, representatives of the audio-visual sector
issued a joint statement affirming their commitment to continue
working towards the further development of cross-border
portability14

See the document “Licences for Europe – tem pledges to bring
more content
online”:http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/copyright/docs/licences-for-europe/131113_ten-pledges_en.pdf.

.

Despite progress, there are continued problems with the
cross-border provision of, and access to, services. These
problems are most obvious to consumers wanting to access
services that are made available in Member States other than
the one in which they live. Not all online services are
available in all Member States and consumers face problems when
trying to access such services across borders. In some
instances, even if the “same” service is available in all
Member States, consumers cannot access the service across
borders (they can only access their “national” service, and if
they try to access the "same" service in another Member State
they are redirected to the one designated for their country of
residence).

This situation may in part stem from the territoriality of
rights and difficulties associated with the clearing of rights
in different territories. Contractual clauses in licensing
agreements between right holders and distributors and/or
between distributors and end users may also be at the origin of
some of the problems (denial of access, redirection).

The main issue at stake here is, therefore, whether further
measures (legislative or non-legislative, including market-led
solutions) need to be taken at EU level in the medium term15

For possible long term measures such as the establishment of a
European Copyright Code (establishing a single title) see
section VII of this consultation document.

to increase the cross-border availability of content services in
the Single Market, while ensuring an adequate level of
protection for right holders.

[In particular if you are an end user/consumer:]Have you faced
problems when trying to access online services in an EU Member
State other than the one in which you live?

 YES - Please provide examples indicating theMember State,
the sector and the type of content concerned (e.g. premium
content such as certain films and TV series, audio-visual
content in general, music, e-books, magazines, journals and
newspapers, games, applications and other software)

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO

 NO OPINION

[In particular if you are a service provider:]Have you faced
problems when seeking to provide online services across borders
in the EU?

 YES - Please explain whether such problems, in your
experience, are related to copyright or to other issues (e.g.
business decisions relating to the cost of providing services
across borders, compliance with other laws such as consumer
protection)? Please provide examples indicating the Member
State, the sector and the type of content concerned (e.g.
premium content such as certain films and TV series,
audio-visual content in general, music, e-books, magazines,
journals and newspapers, games, applications and other
software).

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO

 NO OPINION

[In particular if you are a right holder or a collective
management organisation:]How often are you asked to grant
multi-territorial licences? Please indicate, if possible,the
number of requests per year and provide examples indicating the
Member State, the sector and the type of content concerned.

[Open question]

Music publishers are granting multi-territorial licenses on a
daily basis and for many thousands of products every year. As a
way of example, iTunes, YouTube, Spotify & Amazon are all
licensed on a multi territory basis. Licenses for online
commercials are, by nature, usually worldwide. Most TV and film
licenses cover several European territories. Licenses for
download, streaming or other digital services are offered on a
pan-European basis. It should be noted, however, that in most
cases users do not want to license multiple territories as
their marketing campaigns or digital services are only targeted
at one or afew territories.

If you have identified problems in the answers to any of the
questions above – what would be the best way to tackle them?

[Open question]

SiPA would like to emphasise that the existing copyright
framework has, and, continues to enablethe development of
diverse and numerous licensing models at a European level. SiPA
does not therefore accept that the issues identified by the
Commission (territoriality of rights; clearing rights in
different territories and contractual clauses in licensing
agreements) create difficulties in accessing online content
services.

[In particular if you are a right holder or a collective
management organisation:]Are there reasons why, even in cases
where you hold all the necessary rights for all theterritories
in question, you would still find it necessary or justified to
impose territorial restrictions on a service provider (in
order, for instance, to ensure that access to certain content
is not possible in certain European countries)?

 YES – Please explain by giving examples

No. We do not impose territorial restrictions. As explained in
questions 3 and 4 above, when limitations exist to cross-border
services, they are the result of each service’s operational
needs and intention to meet consumer demand by adapting to
local markets. The reasons for this vary; testing business
models, infrastructure costs, establishing relationships with
local ISPs and advertisers, the need for a local presence to
provide targeted content, etc. There are examples in the EU
where some services have chosen to launch in all the EU Member
States at the same time while others which are almost identical
have chosen to launch in different territories at different
times. The result is that the latter is proving much more
successful. This shows how the choice of a service to launch in
a specific territory is based on different factors other than
the difficulty in clearing rights. Services need to take time
to establish a relationship with local partners, (sometimes
this takes longer than expected due to the local
quasi-monopolies of certain ISPs, for example), carry out
market studies of consumer behaviour, etc. As rightsholders,
music publishers do not impose territorial restrictions – they
respond to the demands of the online service providers. Of
course they can only license for the territories they represent
but in these cases service providers can still obtain the rights
from the appropriate rightsholder. In some exceptional cases
music publishers may limit the territory by license. This is
the case for commercial syncs when payment is closely related
to the size of the market being addressed and the advertiser
wishes to target its campaign to a curtained defined territory.
By limiting the territory, music publishers are ableto offer the
use of the requested song at a lower rate than if they were
required to offer the use to all the EEA. This is because a
song may have a separate commercial value, perhaps to a
competingproducer, in the remaining territories. Print music is
sometimes licensed by territory. In light of this, these
possible restrictions have nothing to do with copyright law. In
addition to the above, there is no legal reason to restrict the
ability of a rightsholder to control the exploitation of his
work and tolimit it geographically. Indeed, the Coditel I and
II Cases were clear when they stated that “the rules of the
Treaty cannot in principle constitute an obstacle to the
geographical limits which the parties to a contract of
assignment have agreed upon in order to protect the author and
his assigns in this regard .” Furthermore, “a contract whereby
the owner of the copyright in a film grants an exclusive right
to exhibit that film for a specific period in the territory of
a Member State is not, as such, subject to the prohibition
contained in Article 85 of the Treaty

 NO

 NO OPINION

[In particular if you are e.g. a broadcaster or a service
provider:]Are there reasons why, even in cases where you have
acquired all the necessary rights for all the territories in
question, you would still find it necessary or justified to
impose territorial restrictions on the service recipient (in
order for instance, to redirect the consumer to a different
website than the one he is trying to access)?

 YES – Please explainby giving examples

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO

 NO OPINION

Do you think that further measures (legislative or
non-legislative, including market-led solutions) are needed at
EU level to increase the cross-border availability of content
services in the Single Market, while ensuring an adequate level
of protection for right holders?

 YES – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO – Please explain

Further to our responses above, we believe that the existing EU
copyright framework has been enabling the development of
numerous licensing models at European level. Nonetheless, the
situation could improve. The most important measure that is
needed to increase the cross-border availability of content
services in the Single Market is inextricably linked to the
protection of rightsholders. In order for the Digital Single
Market to fully develop, existing measures in relation to
piracy and enforcement of IPRsneed to be effectively
implemented by EU Member States. Rightsholders are doing their
part and are busy developing new business models to meet
consumer demand in the digital era but piracy continues to be
the most important factor hindering the development of the
market. Effective implementation of the existing EU laws in
this regard will enable the creation of a level playing field
and provideincentives for legitimate players to enter the
online distribution. Increased cooperation from intermediaries
andensuring that adequate remedies to address illegal websites
are available for rightsholders is crucial. In addition, we
call upon the Commission to harmonise the discrepancies in
fiscal policy among Member States, particularly in the field of
VAT, as theyare an obstacle. The introduction of a reduced VAT
for the delivery of online cultural products would provide a
major consumer boost for the development of the Digital Single
Market. We also look forward to developments in the field of
micro-payments, digital signatures, diverging advertising
standards or restrictions, broadband infrastructure, consumer
protection regulations, etc. Finally, we would like to point
out a market and industry led initiative that, once in place,
will be an instrument to facilitate music licensing: the Global
Repertoire Database (see question 19 below).

 NO OPINION

Is there a need for more clarity as regards the scope of what
needs to be authorised (or not) in digital transmissions?[The
definition of the rights involved in digital transmissions]

The EU framework for the protection of copyright and related
rights in the digital environment is largely established by
Directive 2001/29/EC16

Directive 2001/29/EC of the European Parliament and of the
Council of 22 May 2001 on the harmonisation of certain aspects
of copyright and related rights in the information society.

on the harmonisation of certain aspects of copyright and related
rights in the information society. OtherEU directives in this
field that are relevant in the onlineenvironment are those
relating to the protection of software17

Directive 2009/24/EC of the European Parliament and of the
Council of 23 April 2009 on the legal protection of computer
programs.

and databases18

Directive 96/9/EC of the European Parliamentand of the Council
of 11 March 1996 on the legal protection of databases.

.

Directive 2001/29/ECharmonises the rights of authors and
neighbouring rightholders19

Film and record producers, performers and broadcasters are
holders of so-called “neighbouringrights” in, respectively,
their films, records, performances and broadcast. Authors’
content protected by copyright is referred to as a “work” or
“works”, while content protected by neighbouring rights is
referred to as “other subject matter”.

which are essential for the transmission of digital copies of
works (e.g. an e-book) and other protected subject matter (e.g.
a record in a MP3 format) over the internet or similar digital
networks.

The most relevant rights for digital transmissions are the
reproduction right, i.e. the right to authorise or prohibit the
making of copies20

The right to “authorise or prohibit direct or indirect,
temporary or permanent reproduction by any means and in any
form, in whole or in part” (see Art. 2 of Directive
2001/29/EC)although temporary acts of reproduction of a
transient or incidental nature are, under certain conditions,
excluded (see art. 5(1) of Directive 2001/29/EC).

, (notably relevant at the start of the transmission – e.g. the
uploading of a digital copy of a work to a server in view of
making it available – and at the users’ end – e.g. when a user
downloads a digital copy of a work) and the communication to
the public/making available right, i.e. the rights to authorise
or prohibit the dissemination of the works in digital networks21

The right to authorise or prohibit any communication to the
public by wire or wireless means and to authorise or prohibit
the making available to the public “on demand” (see Art. 3 of
Directive 2001/29/EC).

. These rights are intrinsically linked in digital transmissions
and both need to be cleared.

The act of “making available”

Directive 2001/29/EC specifies neitherwhatis covered by the
making available right (e.g. the upload, the accessibility by
the public, the actual receptionby the public) norwherethe act
of “making available” takes place. This does not raise
questions if the act is limited to a single territory.
Questions arise however when the transmission covers several
territories and rights need to be cleared (does theact of
"making available" happen in the country of the upload only? in
each of the countries where the content is potentially
accessible? in each of the countries where the content is
effectively accessed?). The most recent case law of the Court
of Justice of the European Union (CJEU) suggests that a
relevant criterion is the “targeting” of a certain Member
State's public22

See in particular Case C-173/11 (Football Dataco vs Sportradar)
and Case C-5/11 (Donner) for copyright and related rights, and
Case C-324/09 (L’Oréal vs eBay) for trademarks. With regard to
jurisdiction see also joined Cases C-585/08 and C-144/09
(Pammer and Hotel Alpenhof) and pending CaseC-441/13 (Pez
Hejduk); see however, adopting a different approach, Case
C-170/12 (Pinckney vs KDGMediatech).

. According to this approach the copyright-relevant act (which
has to be licensed) occurs at least in those countries which
are “targeted” by the online service provider. A service
provider “targets” a group of customers residing in a specific
country when it directs its activity to that group, e.g. via
advertisement, promotions, a language or a currency
specifically targeted at that group.

Is the scope of the “making available” right in cross-border
situations – i.e. when content isdisseminated across borders –
sufficiently clear?

 YES

 NO – Please explain how this could be clarified and what
type of clarification would be required (e.g. as in "targeting"
approach explained above, as in "country of origin" approach23

The objective of implementing a “country of origin” approach is
to localise the copyright relevant act that must be licenced in
a single Member State (the "country of origin", which could be
for example the Member State in which the content is uploaded
or where the service provider is established), regardless of in
how many Member States the work can be accessed or received.
Such an approach has already been introduced at EU level with
regard to broadcasting by satellite (see Directive 93/83/EEC on
the coordination ofcertain rules concerning copyright and rights
related to copyright applicable to satellite broadcasting and
cable retransmission).

)

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO OPINION

[In particular if you are aright holder:]Could a clarification
of the territorial scope of the “making available” right have
an effect on the recognition of your rights (e.g. whether you
are considered to be an author or not, whether you are
considered to have transferred your rights or not), on your
remuneration, or on the enforcement of rights (including the
availability of injunctive relief24

Injunctive relief is a temporary or permanent remedy allowing
the right holder to stop or prevent an infringement of his/her
right.

)?

 YES – Please explain how such potential effects could be
addressed

A clarification of the territorial scope of the right would
result in its limitation. The right of making available is key
to on line licensing and enforcement. “Clarifications” aimed at
limiting its scope of application to the targeted country/ies of
exploitation or the country of origin would limit protection. It
would not only create further barriers and bottlenecks
andnegatively affect the recognition of rights, their level of
protectionand the possibility to ensure remuneration for all
creative contributors, but it would also undermine effective
enforcement. A limitation of this kind would likely result in
expropriation of national rights. Moreover, applying only the
law of the “countryof origin” (assuming such a country can be
identified and remains stable) would interfere with
cross-border enforcement. It would be more difficult to provide
evidence that, say, a pirate site, is using intermediary
services to infringe copyright in another country, if the basis
right infringed is artificially considered as relevant only in
the country of origin . Thus rightsholders, who are already
struggling in securing proper enforcement of their rights,
could be faced with further difficulties. The relevant history
and case law tells us that making available takes place both
where content is offered and where it is accessible by the
public. This is a reflection of the interactive nature of the
right, it is vitally important to licensing and to content
protection. Amending the scope of this right, including via one
of the suggested routes is likely undermine the value of this
right as a licensing and enforcement tool. In practice,
litigation already takes place where the infringing act takes
place (countrywhere the act of upload happens and where the
content is accessed). This approach has also been confirmed by
national courts.

 NO

 NO OPINION

Two rights involved in a single act of exploitation

Each act of transmission in digital networks entails (inthe
current state of technology and law) several reproductions.
This means that there are two rights that apply to digital
transmissions: the reproduction right and the making available
right. This may complicate the licensing of works for online
use notably when the two rights are held by different
persons/entities.

[In particular if you a service provider or a right holder:]Does
the application of two rights to a single act of economic
exploitation in the online environment (e.g. a download) create
problems for you?

 YES – Please explain what type of measures would be needed
in order to address such problems (e.g. facilitation of joint
licences when the rights are in different hands, legislation to
achieve the "bundling of rights")

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO

 NO OPINION

Linking and browsing

Hyperlinks are references to data that lead a user from one
location in the Internet to another. They are indispensable for
the functioningof the Internet as a network. Several cases are
pending before the CJEU25

Cases C-466/12 (Svensson), C-348/13 (Bestwater International)
and C-279/13 (C More entertainment).

in which the question has been raised whether the provision of
a clickable linkconstitutes an act of communication to the
public/making available to the public subject to the
authorisation of the rightholder.

A user browsing the internet (e.g. viewing a web-page) regularly
creates temporary copies of works and other
subject-matterprotected under copyright on the screen and in
the 'cache' memory of his computer. A question has been
referred to the CJEU26

Case C-360/13 (Public Relations Consultants Association Ltd).
See
alsohttp://www.supremecourt.gov.uk/decided-cases/docs/UKSC_2011_0202_PressSummary.pdf.

as to whether such copies are always covered by the mandatory
exception for temporary acts of reproduction provided for in
Article5(1) of Directive 2001/29/EC.

Should the provision of a hyperlink leading to a work or other
subject matter protected under copyright, either in general or
under specific circumstances, be subject to the authorisation
of the rightholder?

 YES – Pleaseexplain whether you consider this to be the case
in general, or under specific circumstances, and why

We would like to point out in the first place that we don‘ t
believe that a general answer to such a question can be
usefully offered. Providing a link isnot a category that in
itself can be usefully analysed, without reference to specific
facts and circumstances that qualify it. As mentioned by the
Commission in this consultation document, there are various
cases pending before the CJEU. Therefore we believe that it
would be premature to come up with a solution without having
prior clarification from the Court on this matter. However,
noting this, there are some judgements by national courts that
are relevant and useful. In the Netherlands, the District Court
of The Hague has ruled that that a website that is embedding or
linking to radio streams without a licence infringes copyright
. In another case , the Court of Amsterdam decided that
publishing hyperlinks to copyrighted content is, under certain
circumstances, a copyright infringement. For this publication
to be an infringement, there must be an intervention, a new
audience and profit (this does not necessarily have to be
economic profit; it can be the attraction of new
visitors/customers). In our view,since hyperlinking is an
essential part of the way the Internet functions, SiPA
considers that placing of hyperlinks for the purposes of making
available protected content without the authorisation of the
rightsholders should be considered as an infringement to
copyright. The nature of the content to which the hyperlink is
leading is crucial: if it leads to licensed content, then there
is no infringement. However, if the hyperlink leads to
unlicensed content the making available of which has not been
authorised by the rightsholder, then there is an infringement.

 NO – Please explain whether you consider this to be the case
in general, or under specific circumstances, and why (e.g.
because it does not amount to an act of communication to the
public – or toa new public, or because it should be covered by
a copyright exception)

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO OPINION

Should the viewing of a web-page where this implies the
temporary reproduction of a work orother subject matter
protected under copyright on the screen and in the cache memory
of the user’s computer, either in general or under specific
circumstances, be subject to the authorisation of the
rightholder?

 YES – Please explain whether you consider this to be the
case in general, or under specific circumstances, and why

As with question 11 above, we don’t believe that this question
can be anwered with a straight yes or no answer, unless it is
made clear what kind of browsing is being envisaged. This
question gives no definition and no reference as to whether we
are looking at end users activities or also at search
results/platforms. Furthermore, and given the pending cases
before the CJEU, we believe that it would be premature to come
up with a solution without having prior clarification from the
Court. We further believe that the Copyright Directive already
provides the answer to this question. In particular, Article
5.1 of the Directive outlines when the exclusive right of
reproduction can be exempted. That is; only temporary acts of
reproduction, which are transient or incidental and an integral
and essential part of a technological process and whose sole
purpose is to enable (a) a transmission in a network between
third parties by an intermediary,or (b) a lawful use of a work
or other subject-matter to be made, and which have no
independent economic significance, shall be exempted from the
reproduction right. From an end user perspective, copies
necessary to allow for browsing, i.e. copies on his/her
computer may well fall under art 5(1). However, copies residing
on providers’ servers are not temporary. In addition, browsing
can fall within the remits of Article 5.1 of the Copyright
Directive, if the conditions therein are met. In light of this,
SiPA takes the position that no broadening of this existing
copyright exception should be considered and that this
exception should remain subject to all its pre-conditions. In
particular, we consider that the condition that only temporary
acts of reproduction “which have no independent economic
significance” is crucial. For example, viewing a website where
music is streamed can be considered as browsing. However this
act has an “independent economic significance“and should be
considered out of the scope of browsing and therefore subject
to the rightsholders’ authorisation. Browsing is an end user
activity and should not be confused with or excuse
infringements by websites, search results and other activities
that require authorisation.

 NO – Please explainwhether you consider this to be the case
in general, or under specific circumstances, and why (e.g.
because it is or should be covered by a copyright exception)

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO OPINION

Download to own digital content

Digital content is increasingly being bought via digital
transmission (e.g. download to own). Questions arise as to the
possibility for users to dispose of the files they buy in this
manner (e.g. by selling them or by giving themas a gift). The
principle of EU exhaustion of the distribution right applies in
the case of the distribution of physical copies (e.g. when a
tangible article such as a CD or a book, etc. is sold, the
right holder cannot prevent the further distribution ofthat
tangible article)27

See also recital 28 of Directive 2001/29/EC.

. The issue that arises here is whether this principle can also
be applied in the case of an act of transmission equivalent in
its effect to distribution (i.e. where the buyer acquiresthe
property of the copy)28

In Case C-128/11 (Oracle vs. UsedSoft) the CJEU ruled that an
author cannot oppose the resale of a second-hand licence that
allows downloading his computer program from his website and
using it for an unlimited period of time.The exclusive right of
distribution of a copy of a computer program covered by such a
licence is exhausted on its first sale. While it is thus
admitted that the distribution right may be subject to
exhaustion in case of computer programs offered for download
with the right holder’s consent, the Court was careful to
emphasise that it reached this decision based on the Computer
Programs Directive. It was stressed that this exhaustion rule
constituted alex specialisin relation to the Information
Society Directive (UsedSoft, par. 51, 56).

. This raises difficult questions,notably relating to the
practical application of such an approach (how to avoid
re-sellers keeping and using a copy of a work after they have
“re-sold” it – this is often referred to as the “forward and
delete” question) as well as to the economic implications of
the creation of a second-hand market of copies of perfect
quality that never deteriorate (in contrast to the second-hand
market for physical goods).

[In particular if you are an end user/consumer:]Have you faced
restrictions when trying to resell digital files that you have
purchased (e.g. mp3 file, e-book)?

 YES – Please explain by giving examples

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO

NO OPINION

[In particular if you are a right holder or a service provider:]
What would be the consequences of providing a legal framework
enabling the resale of previously purchased digital content?
Please specify per market (type of content) concerned.

[Open question]

The resale of a previously purchased physical copy of protected
content, such as a CD, is not comparable to resale of a digital
file online. The rights implicated in online licensing are the
making available and the reproduction rights. These rights are
not subject to exhaustion. Creating an ad hoc exhaustion
doctrine for content acquired on line would be a limitation
incompatible with the 3 Step Test: • There is no secure and
reliable “forward and delete” technology; • One purchased
digitalcopy could, without any loss of quality, be resold
millions of times to the point of turning what would be a
secondary market into a primary one. It would thus conflict
with normal exploitation and unreasonably prejudice
rightsholders’ interests. • Such limitation would have
consequences beyond the EU borders, which would need to be
studied carefully. Downloading a digital file is not a purchase
but a licence to make a digital copy, so cannot be deemed to be
‘owned’ as it would be in the physical world. Licences for
each digital service are different: it is not about ownership
of digital content. Enabling the resale of previously purchased
digital content would be the same thing as unduly limiting the
reproduction and the making available rights enshrined inthe EU
Copyright Directive. It would also open the door to the
legalisation of piracy: a digital first sale exception would
allow users to create perfect copies of the original work and
distribute any number of these copies to others without the
creator receiving any compensation. In addition, it would also
have the unwanted effect of increasing the price of the first
original copy, which would also be unwelcomed by consumers.
Most importantly, there is no economic reason to enable the
resale of digital content. In the digital world, digital music
services such as Spotify already allow consumers to share
entire playlists for free. Similarly, businesses have developed
to provide libraries with the ability to stream music to their
users with prices adjusted to reflect different library
budgets. There is therefore no need to introduce measures to
change the status quo, where consumers’ needs are being
addressed by the marketplace. Please note that in the US, where
there are ongoing discussions on the revision of copyright(Green
Paper, Copyright Policy, Creativity and Innovation in the
Digital Economy published by the Department of Commerce’s
Internet Policy Task Force), the Copyright Office has
recommended that the first sale doctrine should not be extended
todigital transmissions. In addition the recent Court case
Capitol Records, the Court has rejected the first sale defence
to digital music downloads

Registration of works and other subject matter – is it a good
idea?

Registration is not often discussed incopyright in the EU as the
existing international treaties in the area prohibit formalities
as a condition for the protection and exercise of rights.
However, this prohibition is not absolute29

For example, it does not affect “domestic” works – i.e.
worksoriginating in the country imposing the formalities as
opposed to works originating in another country.

. Moreover a system of registration does not need to be made
compulsory or constitute a precondition for the protection and
exercise of rights. With a longer term of protection and with
the increased opportunities that digital technology provides
for the use of content (including older works and works that
otherwise would not have been disseminated), the advantages and
disadvantages of a system of registration are increasingly being
considered30

On the basis of Article 3.6 of the Directive 2012/28/EU of the
European Parliament and of the Council of 25 October 2012 on
certain permitted uses of orphan works, a publicly accessible
online database is currently being set up by the Office for
Harmonisation of the Internal Market (OHIM) for the
registration of orphan works.

.

Would the creation of a registration system at EU level help in
the identification and licensing of works and other subject
matter?

 YES

 NO

 NO OPINION

What would be the possible advantages of such a system?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

What would be the possible disadvantages of such a system?

[Open question]

Imposing a registration system in the EU would be contrary to
international law binding the EU and its Member States, create
more burdens for rightsholders while not ensuring that there is
an effective protection of their rights. In addition,
“registration” is already taking place one way or the other:
Rightsholders are in the majority of the cases “registered” to
a CMO. Therefore, there is no need to establish yet another
registration system. What needs to be done is to ensure that
CMOs’ databases containonly “clean” data and accurate
information of rights ownership in order to facilitate
efficient cross border licensing and the distribution of
royalties to the relevant rightsholders in a consistent manner
across Europe. In addition, authors and composersalso see their
rights “registered” in their music publishers’ databases.So,
bearing in mind that there are several “registrations” possible
in place, the challenge to be addressed now would be getting all
these databases to contain clean and up to date data easily
displayable to the interested party in a practical way. In this
regard, the music industry is already working towards a Global
Repertoire Database (GRD) which will provide, for the first
time ever, a single, comprehensive and authoritative
representation of the global ownership and control of musical
works for the benefit of authors and composers, music
publishers, CMOs, users and consumers. (See question 19 below
for further information).

What incentives for registration by rightholders could be
envisaged?

[Open question]

As mentioned above, music rightsholders are already voluntarily
registering their rights through CMOs, for them to manage their
rights and distribute back to the appropriate rightsholder the
royalties due. In our view, this should be the only
registration that should be envisaged. The incentive is no less
than the certainty that when a CMO is working efficiently and in
a transparent way, rightsholders are ensured their royalties.
The timely implementation of the soon to be adopted CRM
Directive will also be of great assistance on this matter. In
addition, if a registry was deemed to be authoritative (i.e.
GRD), it could in some way help with enforcement of music
rightsholders’ rights.

How to improve the use and interoperabilityof identifiers

There are many private databases of works and other subject
matter held by producers, collective management organisations,
and institutions such as libraries, which are based to
a greater or lesser extent on the use of (more or
less)interoperable, internationally agreed ‘identifiers’.
Identifiers can be compared to a reference number embedded in a
work, are specific to the sector in which they have been
developed31

E.g. the International Standard Recording Code (ISRC) is used to
identify recordings, the International Standard Book Number
(ISBN) is used to identify books.

, and identify, variously, the work itself, the owner or the
contributor to a work or other subject matter. There are
notable examples of where industry is undertakingactions to
improve the interoperability of such identifiers and databases.
The Global Repertoire Database32

You will find more information about this initiative on the
following website:http://www.globalrepertoiredatabase.com/.

should, once operational, provide a single source of information
on the ownership and control of musical works worldwide. The
Linked Content Coalition33

You will find more information about this initiative (funded in
partby the European Commission) on the following website:
www.linkedcontentcoalition.org.

was established to develop building blocks for the expression
and management of rights and licensing across all content and
media types. It includes the development of aRights Reference
Model (RRM) – a comprehensive data model for all types of
rights in all types of content. The UK Copyright Hub34

You will find more information about this initiative on the
following website:http://www.copyrighthub.co.uk/.

is seeking to take such identification systems a step further,
and to create a linked platform, enabling automated licensing
across different sectors.

What should be the role of the EU in promoting the adoption
of identifiers in the content sector, and in promoting the
development and interoperability of rights ownership and
permissions databases?

[Open question]

In its Communication “A Single Market for Intellectual Property
Rights”, the Commission stated that interoperable online
databases should help identify rightsholders and foster the
development of licensing infrastructures. In the same
Communication, the Commission announced that it would support
measures to make it simpler and efficient to access copyright
protected works through innovative licensing technologies,
certification of licensing infrastructures, identification and
data exchange of actual usage and electronic data management.
It committed to encourage and support projects undertaken by
various stakeholders to develop automated and integrated
standards-based rights management infrastructures. As you know,
the international music publishing community is committed to,
and deeply involved in the ambitious project of a Global
Repertoire Database (GRD). While the pressing need for the
establishment of the GRD has long been recognised in the music
community, one of the key reasons for its development was
recently confirmed when data assessment exercises carried out
by the various GRD work strands revealed the shockingly poor
quality of data with which European CMOs are currently working.
We know that the Commission has signalled the importance of an
effective means of processing of data, and the above examples
highlight the urgency of delivering a first release ofthe GRD
by 2016 as per the current schedule. Data inaccuracies such as
these prevent the correct processing and invoicing of uses of
musical works and undermine the legitimacy of the system of
music rights administration in Europe. Since the formation
ofthe GRD Working Group (WG), music publishers have been
cooperating closely with composers, songwriters, CMOs and
digital service providers to bring the idea of a single,
authoritative database on global ownership and control of
musical works to fruition. From September 2011 to March 2012,
the GRD WG completed a Stakeholder Engagement and Scoping Study
to determine the technical, data, business process and
organisational design aspects of the GRD. Since the launch of
the Requirements and Design phase in October 2012,
representatives of participating stakeholder groups have been
hard at work, defining the GRD business requirements, data
standards, technology blueprint and business design. Following
considerable investment of time and effort, the Requirements
and Design phase was completed in May of last year. The project
moved into technology build in October 2013, with a first
release anticipated in 2016. This is a crucial project and
there remains an acute need to establish the GRD as soon as
technically feasible. A single authoritative database on
musical works ownership and control would not only bring
immense benefits to the individual players, big and small, in
the music industry by reducing costs and administrative
burdens, it would also help drive forward the digital economy,
both in Europe and internationally. We are aware from our
participation in the LfE dialogue that the Commission is
interested in developing practical industry-led solutions in
the areas of licensing and cross-border portability of online
content, and we believe that the GRD is integral to this
process. In our view, the Commission should continue to promote
the development and interoperability of rights ownership and
permissions databases, in particular the GRD. First and
foremost, political support from the Commission is needed. The
unprecedented level of ambition and scale associated with this
global project makes it dependent on the reliable support and
cooperation of all participating stakeholder organisations. In
order to continuemaking developments in this project, we need
to keep pushing ahead with the building of the GRD. SiPA
realises this and, on behalf of the global music publishing
community, we are fully committed to working towards this goal.
At this advanced stage of theproject, any delay, lackof
commitment or inability to compromise among the participating
organisations could result in irreparable harm to the GRD’s
legitimacy and momentum, and endanger its timely
implementation. Complete cooperation is required in orderfor
all parties to be able to reap the full benefits of this
innovative project. In this respect, the Commission’s continued
support and active encouragement on this issue would be very
much appreciated. It could also be envisaged requesting funding
support from the Commission. European programmes like COSME (EU
programme for the Competitiveness of Enterprises and Small and
Medium-sized Enterprises (SMEs)) and the ICT 2014 - Information
and Communications Technologies can be considered in this
regard.

Term of protection – is it appropriate?

Works and other subject matter are protected under copyright for
a limited period of time. After the term of protection has
expired, a work falls into the public domain and can be freely
used by anyone (in accordance with the applicable national
rules on moral rights). The Berne Convention35

Berne Convention for the Protection of Literary and Artistic
Works,http://www.wipo.int/treaties/en/ip/berne/.

requires aminimum term of protection of 50 years after the death
of the author. The EU rules extend this term of protection to 70
years after the death of the author (as do many other countries,
e.g. the US).

With regard to performers in the music sector and phonogram
producers, the term provided for in the EU rules also extend 20
years beyond what is mandated in international agreements,
providing for a term of protection of 70 years after the first
publication. Performers and producers in the audio-visual
sector,however, do not benefit from such an extended term of
protection.

Are the current terms of copyright protection still appropriate
in the digital environment?

 YES – Please explain

SiPA considers the current term of protection (70 p.m.a. for
authors and 70 for performers and sound recordings) is still
very much appropriate in the digital environment. Indeed, as
demonstrated in the Commission's impact study , adopted norms
on term extension will give average performers additional
income ranging from € 150 to € 2000 per year. These amounts,
mostly attributable to airplay royalties, are insignificant for
the big music superstars but they are considerable for many
musical performers, session musicians in particular. Music
publishers spend a lot of time and money bringing writers to
the market. They provide significant advanced payments to these
artists before these artists make any profit. Obviously they are
only able to invest if they can get compensated for their
rights; developing talent is an expensive business. Creative
industries are long term industries that need significant
investments to exist and develop. In an increasingly aging
society, life plus 70 is an appropriate term of protection.
Anything shorter than that has often proven to be too short
torecoup on those investments. It has also often proven
insufficient to allow creators and their descendants to
legitimately benefit from the exploitation of their works. In
addition, the term of protection of 70 p.m.a. for authors is in
line with the termof protection in most of EU’s main trading
partners. Inconsistency in the term of protection would make it
difficult to achieve an appropriate level of efficiency in the
management and the enforcement of intellectual property rights
(IPRs) on an international scale. A reduction of the term
ofprotection in the EU would place EU authors at a clear
disadvantage vis à vis their main trading partners.

 NO – Please explain if they should be longer or shorter

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO OPINION

Limitations and exceptions in the Single Market

Limitations and exceptions to copyright and related rights
enable the use of works and other protected subject-matter,
without obtaining authorisation from therightholders, for
certain purposes and to a certain extent (for instance the use
for illustration purposes of an extract from a novel by a
teacher in a literature class). At EU level they are
established in a number of copyright directives, most notably
Directive 2001/29/EC36

Plus Directive 96/9/ECon the legal protection of
databases;Directive 2009/24/ECon the legal protection of
computer programs,and Directive 92/100/ECon rental right and
lending right.

.

Exceptions and limitations in the national and EU copyright laws
have to respect international law37

Article 9(2) of the Berne Convention for the Protection of
Literary and Artistic Works (1971); Article 13 of the TRIPS
Agreement (Trade Related Intellectual Property Rights) 1994;
Article 16(2) of the WIPO Performers and Phonograms Treaty
(1996); Article 9(2) of the WIPO Copyright Treaty (1996).

. In accordance with international obligations, the EU acquis
requires that limitations and exceptions can only be applied in
certain special cases which do not conflict with a normal
exploitation of the work or other subject matter and do not
unreasonably prejudice the legitimate interest of the
rightholders.

Whereas the catalogue of limitations and exceptions included in
EU law is exhaustive (no other exceptions can be applied to the
rights harmonised at EU level)38

Other than the grandfathering of the exceptions of minor
importance for analogue uses existing in Member States at the
time of adoption of Directive 2001/29/EC (see, Art. 5(3)(o)).

, these limitations and exceptions are often optional39

With the exception of certain limitations: (i) in the Computer
Programs Directive, (ii) in the Database Directive, (iii)
Article 5(1) in the Directive 2001/29/EC and (iv) the Orphan
Works Directive.

, in the sense that Member States are free to reflect in
national legislation as many or as few of them as they wish.
Moreover, the formulation of certain of the limitations and
exceptions is general enough to give significant flexibility to
the Member States as to how, and to what extent, to implement
them (if they decide to do so). Finally, it is worth noting
that not all of the limitations and exceptions included in the
EU legal framework for copyright are of equivalent significance
in policy terms and in terms of theirpotential effect on the
functioning of the Single Market.

In addition, in the same manner that the definition of the
rights is territorial (i.e. has an effect only within the
territory of the Member State), the definition of the
limitations and exceptions to the rights is territorial too (so
an act that is covered by an exception in a Member State "A" may
still require the authorisation of the rightholder once we move
to the Member State "B")40

Only the exception established in the recent Orphan Works
Directive (a mandatory exception to copyright and related
rights in the case where the rightholders are not known or
cannot be located) has been given a cross-border effect, which
means that, for instance, once a literary work – for instance a
novel – is considered an orphan work in a Member State, that
same novel shall be considered an orphan work in all Member
States and can be used and accessed in all Member States.

.

The cross-border effect of limitations and exceptions also
raises the question of fair compensation of rightholders. In
some instances, Member States are obliged to compensate
rightholders for the harm inflicted on them by a limitation or
exception to their rights. In other instances Member States are
not obliged, but may decide, to provide for such compensation.
If a limitation or exception triggering a mechanism of fair
compensation were to be given cross-border effect (e.g. the
books are used for illustration in an online course given by an
university in a Member State "A" and the students are in a
Member State "B") then there would also be a need to clarify
which national law should determine the level of that
compensation and who should pay it.

Finally, the question of flexibility and adaptability is being
raised: what is the best mechanismto ensure that the EU and
Member States’ regulatory frameworks adapt when necessary
(either to clarify that certain uses are covered by an
exception or to confirm that for certain uses the authorisation
of rightholders is required)? The main question hereis whether
a greater degree of flexibility can be introduced in the EU
and Member States regulatory framework while ensuring the
required legal certainty, including for the functioning of the
Single Market, and respecting the EU's international
obligations.

Are there problems arising from the fact that most limitations
and exceptions provided in the EU copyright directives are
optional for the Member States?

 YES – Please explain by referring to specific cases

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO – Please explain

There is no indication that the different national approaches on
some exceptions create difficulties for consumers / users
regarding the use of online services. The most relevant and
important copyright exceptions and limitations have been
adopted by the majority of EU Member States. When a Member
State has not implemented a certain exception it is just due to
national specificities, and we don’t believe that this has a
cross border impact that needs to be addressed.

 NO OPINION

Should some/all of the exceptions be made mandatory and, if so,
is there a need for a higher level of harmonisation of such
exceptions?

 YES – Please explain by referring to specific cases

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO – Please explain

In our view, the current EU exceptions and limitations regime
enables EU Member States to deal adequately with these issues.
SiPA does not see any Internal Market need to make the
exceptions mandatory or a need for a mandatory harmonisation of
such exceptions.

 NO OPINION

Should any new limitations and exceptions be added to or removed
from the existing catalogue?Please explain by referring to
specificcases.

[Open question]

The rationale behind the EU exceptions and limitations regime is
to allow people to use copyrighted works for a specific purpose
as long as it complies with the internationally recognised
principle of the Three Step Test. This Test only allows
exemptions in cases which do not conflict with a normal
exploitation of the work or other subject-matter and do not
unreasonably prejudice the legitimate interests of the
rightsholder. In light of this, SiPA believes that the way
exceptions andlimitations are defined in the EU Copyright
Directive already provides a good balance between
rightsholders’ and users’ needs. These exceptions and
limitations have also shown to be sufficiently flexible to meet
the demands of the move from the analogue todigital world.
Extending the scope of existing exceptions is not the way
forward to provide effective and quicker access to those that
require it. In addition, when considering the need to add or
remove exceptions and limitations from the existing list,
adistinction should be made between what is in the public
interest and what is free riding. In our view, an extension of
the scope of the current exceptions is undesired. Calls from
certain stakeholders for a re-opening of the Directive and a
re-examination of its list of exceptions often hide the
intention to weaken the copyright framework so that they can
develop new commercial services for free at the cost of the
creative and economical efforts of rightsholders. It should not
be forgotten that with technological developments, piracy has
increased significantly. Therefore any exceptions and
limitations must take account the further increased risks that
rightsholders face, particularly in the absence of adequate
collaboration with Internet Service Providers(ISPs) who often
hide behind existing limitations of liability and data
protection rules. In our view, any changes envisaged should be
made taking due consideration of the following factors:
assessment of the impact of each exception on the Internal
Market; that the proposed policy is supported by robust
economic evidence; and that the potential changes are
compatible with international copyright law and the Three Step
Test.

Independently from the questions above, is there a need to
provide for a greaterdegree of flexibility in the EU regulatory
framework for limitations and exceptions?

 YES – Please explain why

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO – Please explain why

As mentioned in earlier responses, Article 5 of the EU Copyright
Directive was drafted taking into account the different needs
and traditions in EU Member States. A list of mostly optional
exceptions allows for an adequate degree of flexibility for
Member States to adopt or adapt their regime tolocal culture
and traditions. The focus should be a good application of these
exceptions by EU Member States.

 NO OPINION

If yes, what would be the best approach to provide for
flexibility? (e.g. interpretation by national courts and the
ECJ, periodicrevisions of the directives, interpretations by
the Commission, built-in flexibility, e.g. in the form of a
fair-use or fair dealing provision / open norm, etc.)? Please
explain indicating what would be the relative advantages and
disadvantages of such anapproach as well as its possible
effects on the functioning of the Internal Market.

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Does the territoriality of limitations and exceptions, in your
experience, constitute a problem?

 YES – Please explain why and specify which exceptions you
are referring to

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO – Please explain why and specify which exceptions you are
referring to

As explained above, Article 5 of the EU Copyright Directive was
drafted taking into account the different needs and traditions
in EU Member States. While it is true that the way that
different EU Member States have implemented these exceptions
into their nationallaw varies in some cases, this is to address
specific national needs. This territoriality of the exceptions
and limitations does not, in our view, distort or create
significant discrepancies in the Internal Market that need to
be addressed. We don’t see how copyright, which is territorial,
could be subject to cross border exceptions.

 NO OPINION

In the event that limitations and exceptions established at
national level were to have cross-border effect, how should the
question of “fair compensation” beaddressed, when such
compensation is part of the exception? (e.g. who pays whom,
where?)

[Open question]

The EU Copyright Directive only mandates the application of a
fair compensation principle to the private copying exception
and leaves the matter at the discretion of EU Member States for
the other exceptions. In addition, some EU Member States also
apply the fair compensation principle to the educational
exception. In our view, the status quo should continue to
prevail. In the event that limitations and exceptions
established at a national level were to have a cross border
effect, the obligation of fair compensation should take place
where the harm is done, by the person whose acts caused the
harm in that country, in accordance with the CJEU Padawan
decision . The making available right also enters into play.
Furthermore, recognising cross border effect on national
exceptions would inevitably multiply the number of applicable
exceptions and impose national traditions on other countries.
This is completely at odds with a list of mostly optional
exceptions currently applicable. If a country has not
implemented private copying, for example, or has not provided
for a system of compensation, the cross border effect of the
exception could deprive rightsholdersof their rights or of the
remuneration due.

Access to content in libraries and archives

Directive 2001/29/EC enables Member States to reflect in their
national law a range of limitations and exceptions for the
benefit of publicly accessible libraries, educational
establishments and museums, as well as archives. If
implemented, these exceptions allow acts of preservation and
archiving41

Article 5(2)c of Directive 2001/29.

and enable on-site consultation of the works and other subject
matter in thecollections of such institutions42

Article 5(3)n of Directive 2001/29.

. The public lending (under an exception or limitation) by these
establishments of physical copies of works and other subject
matter is governed by the Rental and Lending Directive43

Article 5 of Directive 2006/115/EC.

.

Questions arise as to whether the current framework continues to
achieve the objectives envisaged or whether it needs to be
clarified or updated to cover use in digital networks. At the
same time, questions arise as tothe effect of such a possible
expansion on the normal exploitation of works and other subject
matter and as to the prejudice this may cause to rightholders.
The role of licensing and possible framework agreements between
different stakeholders also needs to be considered here.

Preservation and archiving

The preservation of the copies of works or other subject-matter
held in the collections of cultural establishments (e.g. books,
records, or films) – the restoration or replacement of works,
the copying offragile works - may involve the creation of
another copy/ies of these works or other subject matter. Most
Member States provide for an exception in their national laws
allowing for the making of such preservation copies. The scope
of the exception differsfrom Member State to Member State (as
regards the type of beneficiary establishments, the types of
works/subject-matter covered by the exception, the mode of
copying and the number of reproductions that a beneficiary
establishment may make). Also, the current legal status of new
types of preservation activities (e.g. harvesting and archiving
publicly available web content) is often uncertain.

(a)[In particular if you are an institutional user:]Have you
experienced specific problems when trying to use an exception
to preserve and archive specific works or other subject matter
in your collection?

(b)[In particular if you are a right holder:]Have you
experienced problems with the use by libraries, educational
establishments, museum or archives of the preservation
exception?

 YES – Please explain, by Member State, sector, and the type
of use in question.

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO

 NO OPINION

If there are problems, how would they best be solved?

[Open question]

We are not aware of any problems. Should specific problems
arise, these can be solved via negotiated solutions between
rightsholders and users, such as licensing (either directly
negotiated by rightsholders or via CMOs). In our view,
negotiations between rightsholders and users are more flexible
and achieved more quickly than legislation, and would therefore
be in our view the preferred option. In any case, if any
problems arise, Article 5 of the EU Copyright Directive would
provide a solution to the problem.

If your view is that a legislative solution is needed, what
would be its main elements? Which activities of the beneficiary
institutions should be covered and under which conditions?

[Open question]

As mentioned in question 29 above,we don’t think that
legislative solutions are needed.

If your view is that a different solution is needed, what would
it be?

[Open question]

As mentioned in question 29 above, in our view, negotiations
between rightsholders and users are more flexibleand achieved
more quickly than legislation, and would therefore be in our
view the preferred option.

Off-premises access to library collections

Directive 2001/29/EC provides an exception for the consultation
of works and other subject-matter (consulting an e-book,
watching a documentary) via dedicated terminals on the premises
of such establishments for the purpose of research and private
study. The online consultation of works and other
subject-matter remotely (i.e. when the library user is not on
the premises of the library) requires authorisation and is
generally addressed in agreements between
universities/libraries and publishers. Some argue that the law
rather than agreements should provide for the possibility to,
and the conditions for, granting online access to collections.

(a)[In particular if you are an institutional user:]Have you
experienced specific problems when trying to negotiate
agreements with rights holders that enable you to provide
remote access, including across borders, to your collections
(or parts thereof) for purposes of research and private study?

(b)[In particular if you are an end user/consumer:]Have you
experienced specific problems when trying to consult, including
across borders, works and other subject-matter held inthe
collections of institutions such as universities and national
libraries when you are not on the premises of the institutions
in question?

(c)[In particular if you are aright holder:]Have you negotiated
agreements with institutional users that enablethose
institutions to provide remote access, including across
borders, to the works or other subject-matter in their
collections, for purposes of research and private study?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

If there are problems, how would they best be solved?

[Open question]

We are not aware of any problems. Should specific problems
arise, these can be solved via negotiated solutions between
rightsholders and users,such as licensing (either directly
negotiated by rightsholders or via CMOs). In our view,
negotiations between rightsholders and users are more flexible
and achieved more quickly than legislation, and would therefore
be in our view the preferred option.

If your view is that a legislative solution is needed, what
would be its main elements? Which activities of the beneficiary
institutions should be covered and under which conditions?

[Open question]

As mentioned in question 33, we don’t think thatlegislative
solutions are needed.

If your view is that a different solution is needed, what would
it be?

[Open question]

As mentioned in question 33, in our view, negotiations between
rightsholders and users are more flexible and achieved more
quickly than legislation, and would therefore be in our view
the preferred option.

E – lending

Traditionally, public libraries have loaned physical copies of
works (i.e. books, sometimes also CDs and DVDs) to their users.
Recent technological developments have madeit technically
possible for libraries to provide users with temporary access
to digital content, such as e-books, music or films via
networks. Under the current legal framework, libraries need to
obtain the authorisation of the rights holders to organisesuch
e-lending activities. In various Member States, publishers and
libraries are currently experimenting with different business
models for the making available of works online, including
direct supply of e-books to libraries by publishers or bundling
byaggregators.

(a)[In particular if you are alibrary:]Have you experienced
specific problems when trying to negotiate agreements to enable
the electronic lending (e-lending), including across borders, of
books or other materials held in your collection?

(b)[In particular if you are an end user/consumer:]Have you
experienced specific problems when trying to borrow books or
other materials electronically (e-lending), including across
borders, from institutions such as public libraries?

(c)[In particularif you are aright holder:]Have you negotiated
agreements with libraries to enable them to lend books or other
materials electronically, including across borders?

 YES – Please explain with specific examples

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO

 NO OPINION

If there are problems, how would they best be solved?

[Open question]

We are not aware of any problems. Should specific problems
arise, these can be solved via negotiated solutions between
rightsholdersand users, such as licensing (either directly
negotiated by rightsholders or via CMOs). In our view,
negotiations between rightsholders and users are more flexible
and achieved more quickly than legislation, and would therefore
be in our view the preferredoption.

The following two questions are relevant both to this point (n°
3) and the previous one (n° 2).

[In particular if you are an institutional user:]What
differences do you see in the management of physical and online
collections, includingproviding access to your subscribers? What
problems have you encountered?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

[In particular if you are a right holder:]What difference do you
see between libraries’traditional activities such as on-premises
consultation or public lending and activities such as
off-premises (online, at a distance) consultation and
e-lending? What problems have you encountered?

[Open question]

We don’t think that there are any problems. Should specific
problems arise, these can be solved by negotiated solutions
between rightsholders and users, such as licensing (either
directly negotiated by rightsholders or via CMOs). In our view,
negotiations between rightsholders and users are moreflexible
and quicker achieved than legislation, and therefore the
preferred option. In addition, in our view, giving e-lending
rights to libraries would be extremely harmful because it would
destroy the existing market. In Finland, for example, only
creators are remunerated for the lending of physical products;
while music and book publishers and record labels get nothing.
The e-lending right would make the situation even worse.

Mass digitisation

The term “mass digitisation” is normally used to refer toefforts
by institutions such as libraries and archives to digitise (e.g.
scan) the entire content or part of their collections with an
objective to preserve these collections and, normally, to make
them available to the public. Examples are efforts by libraries
to digitise novels form the early part of the 20thcentury or
whole collections of pictures of historical value. This matter
has been partly addressed at the EU level by the 2011
Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) on key principles on
thedigitisation and making available of out of commerce works
(i.e. works which are no longer found in the normal channels of
commerce), which is aiming to facilitate mass digitisation
efforts (for books and learned journals) on the basis of
licence agreements between libraries and similar cultural
institutions on the one hand and the collecting societies
representing authors and publishers on the other44

You will find more information about his MoU on the following
website:http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/copyright/out-of-commerce/index_en.htm.

. Provided the required funding is ensured (digitisation
projects are extremely expensive), the result of this MoU
shouldbe that books that are currently to be found only in the
archives of, for instance, libraries will be digitised and made
available online to everyone. The MoU is based on voluntary
licences (granted by Collective Management Organisations on the
basis of the mandates they receive from authors and publishers).
Some Member States may need to enact legislation to ensure the
largest possible effect of such licences (e.g. by establishing
in legislation a presumption of representation of a collecting
society or the recognition of an “extended effect” to the
licences granted)45

France and Germany have already adopted legislation to back the
effects of the MoU.The French act (LOI n° 2012-287 du 1er mars
2012 relative à l'exploitation numérique des livres
indisponibles du xxe siècle) foresees collective management,
unless the author or publisher in question opposes such
management.The German act (Gesetz zur Nutzung verwaister und
vergriffener Werke und einer weiteren Änderung des
Urheberrechtsgesetzes vom 1.Oktober 2013) contains a legal
presumption of representation by a collecting society in
relation to works whose rightholders are not members of the
collecting society.

.

[In particular if you are an institutional user,engaging or
wanting to engage in mass digitisation projects, a right
holder, a collective management organisation:]Would it be
necessary in your country to enact legislation to ensure that
the results of the 2011 MoU (i.e. the agreements concluded
between libraries and collecting societies) havea cross-border
effect so that out of commerce works can be accessed across the
EU?

 YES – Please explain why and how it could best be achieved

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO OPINION

Would it be necessary to develop mechanisms, beyond those
already agreed for other types of content (e.g. for audio- or
audio-visual collections, broadcasters’ archives)?

 YES –Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO – Please explain

The MOU on key principles on the digitisation and making
available of out of commerce works signed in 2011 was intended
to facilitate agreements in the print sector between parties
such as authors, publishers and libraries, on collective
licensing schemes for the digitisation and making available by
public institutions “out of commerce” printed works (books and
journals) first published in the Member State where the
agreement is intended to be signed. As the Commission
recognises in the FAQ, this agreement is very specific and
sector driven and cannot simply be extended to other types or
forms of protected content. Our view is that there is no case
for a similar arrangement regarding music as digitisation is a
common feature and the chances of music being both in analogue
form and out of commerce are remote.

 NO OPINION

Teaching

Directive 2001/29/EC46

Article 5(3)a of Directive 2001/29.

enablesMember States to implement in their national legislation
limitations and exceptions for the purpose of illustration for
non-commercial teaching. Such exceptions would typically allow
a teacher to use parts of or full works to illustrate his
course, e.g. bydistributing copies of fragments of a book or of
newspaper articles in the classroom or by showing protected
content on a smart board without having to obtain authorisation
from the right holders. The open formulation of this (optional)
provision allows for rather different implementation at Member
States level. The implementation of the exception differs from
Member State to Member State, with several Member States
providing instead a framework for the licensing of content for
certain educational uses. Some argue that the law should
provide for better possibilities for distance learning and
study at home.

(a)[In particular if you are an end user/consumer or an
institutional user:]Have you experienced specific problems when
trying to use works or othersubject-matter for illustration for
teaching, including across borders?

(b)[In particular if you are a right holder:]Have you
experienced specific problems resulting from the way in which
works or other subject-matter are used for illustration for
teaching, including across borders?

 YES – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO

 NO OPINION

If there are problems, how would they best be solved?

[Open question]

As mentioned in question 42, weare not aware of any problems.

What mechanisms exist in the market place to facilitate the use
of content for illustration for teaching purposes? How
successful are they?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

If your view is that a legislative solution is needed, what
would be its main elements? Which activities of the beneficiary
institutions should be covered and under what conditions?

[Open question]

As mentioned in question 42, we don’t think that legislative
solutions are needed.

If your view is that a different solution is needed, what would
it be?

[Open question]

As mentioned in question 42, in our view, negotiations between
rightsholders and users are moreflexible and achieved more
quickly than legislation, and would therefore be in our view
the preferred option.

Research

Directive 2001/29/EC47

Article 5(3)a of Directive 2001/29.

enables Member States to choose whether to implement in their
national lawsa limitation for the purpose of non-commercial
scientific research. The open formulation of this (optional)
provision allows for rather different implementations at Member
States level.

(a)[In particular if you are an end user/consumer or an
institutional user:]Have you experienced specific problems when
trying to use works or other subject matter in the context of
research projects/activities, including across borders?

(b)[In particular if you are a right holder:]Have you
experienced specificproblems resulting from the way in which
works or other subject-matter are used in the context of
research projects/activities, including across borders?

 YES – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO

 NO OPINION

If there are problems, how would they best be solved?

[Open question]

The use of music for research is not very common. In any case,
rightsholders are always open to negotiate licences as
licensing is the essence of music publishersbusiness.

What mechanisms exist in the Member States to facilitate the use
of content for research purposes? How successful are they?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Disabilities

Directive2001/29/EC48

Article 5 (3)b of Directive 2001/29.

provides for an exception/limitation for the benefit of people
with a disability. The open formulation of this (optional)
provision allows for rather different implementations at Member
States level. At EUand international level projects have been
launched to increase the accessibility of works and other
subject-matter for persons with disabilities (notably by
increasing the number of works published in special formats and
facilitating their distribution across the European Union)49

The European Trusted Intermediaries Network (ETIN) resulting
from a Memorandum of Understanding between representatives of
the right-holder community (publishers, authors, collecting
societies) and interested parties such asassociations for blind
and dyslexic persons
(http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/copyright/initiatives/access/index_en.htm)
and the Trusted Intermediary Global Accessible Resources (TIGAR)
project in WIPO (http://www.visionip.org/portal/en/).

.

The Marrakesh Treaty50

Marrakesh Treaty to Facilitate Access to Published Works by
Visually Impaired Persons and Persons with Print Disabilities,
Marrakesh, June 17 to 28 2013.

has been adopted to facilitate access to published works for
persons who are blind, visually impaired, or otherwise print
disabled. The Treaty creates a mandatory exception to copyright
that allowsorganisations for the blind to produce, distribute
and make available accessible format copies to visually
impaired persons without the authorisation of the rightholders.
The EU and its Member States have started work to sign and
ratify the Treaty. This may require the adoption of certain
provisions at EU level (e.g. to ensure the possibility to
exchange accessible format copies across borders).

(a)[In particular if you are a person with a disability or an
organisation representing persons with disabilities:]Have you
experienced problems with accessibility to content, including
across borders, arising from Member States’ implementation of
this exception?

(b)[In particular if you are an organisation providing services
for persons with disabilities:]Haveyou experienced problems
when distributing/communicating works published in special
formats across the EU?

(c)[In particular if you are a right holder:]Have you
experienced specific problems resulting from the application of
limitations or exceptions allowing for
thedistribution/communication of works published in special
formats, including across borders?

 YES – Please explain by giving examples

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO

 NO OPINION

If thereare problems, what could be done to improve
accessibility?

[Open question]

As mentioned in question 50, we are not aware of any problems.

What mechanisms exist in the market place to facilitate
accessibility to content? How successful are they?

[Openquestion]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Text and data mining

Text and data mining/content mining/data analytics51

For the purpose of the present document, the term “text and data
mining” will be used.

are different terms used to describe increasingly important
techniques used in particular by researchers for the
exploration of vast amounts of existing texts and data (e.g.,
journals, web sites, databases etc.). Through the use of
software or other automated processes, an analysis is made of
relevant texts and data in order to obtain new insights,
patterns and trends.

The texts and data used for mining are either freely accessible
on the internet or accessible through subscriptions to e.g.
journals and periodicals that give access to the databases of
publishers. A copy is made of the relevant texts and data (e.g.
on browser cache memories or in computers RAM memories or onto
the hard disk of a computer), prior to the actual analysis.
Normally, it is considered that to mine protected works or
other subject matter, it is necessary to obtain authorisation
from the right holders for the making of such copies unless
such authorisation can be implied (e.g. content accessible to
general public without restrictions on the internet, open
access).

Some argue that the copies required for text and data mining are
covered by the exception for temporary copies in Article 5.1 of
Directive 2001/29/EC. Others consider that text and data mining
activities should not even be seen as covered by copyright. None
of this is clear, in particular since text and data mining does
not consist only of a single method, but can be undertaken in
several different ways. Important questions also remain as to
whether the main problems arising in relation to this issue go
beyond copyright (i.e. beyond the necessity or notto obtain the
authorisation to use content) and relate rather to the need to
obtain “access” to content (i.e. being able to use e.g.
commercial databases).

A specific Working Groupwas set up on this issue in the
framework of the "Licences for Europe" stakeholder dialogue. No
consensus was reached among participating stakeholders on either
the problems to be addressed or the results. At the same time,
practical solutions to facilitate text and data mining of
subscription-based scientific content were presented by
publishers as an outcome of “Licences for Europe”52

See the document “Licences for Europe – ten pledges to bring
more content
online”:http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/copyright/docs/licences-for-europe/131113_ten-pledges_en.pdf.

. In the context of these discussions, other stakeholders argued
that noadditional licences should be required to mine material
to which access has been provided through a subscription
agreement and considered that a specific exception for text and
data mining should be introduced, possibly on the basis of
a distinction between commercial and non-commercial.

(a)[In particular if you are an end user/consumer or an
institutional user:]Have you experienced obstacles, linked to
copyright, when trying to use text or data mining methods,
including across borders?

(b)[In particularif you are a service provider:]Have you
experienced obstacles, linked to copyright, when providing
services based on text or data mining methods, including across
borders?

(c)[In particular if you are a right holder:]Have you
experienced specific problems resulting from the use of text
and data mining in relation to copyright protected content,
including across borders?

 YES – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO – Please explain

We are not aware of any problems. Should specific problems
arise, these can be solved via negotiated solutions between
rightsholders and users, such as licensing (either directly
negotiated by rightsholders or via CMOs). In our view,
negotiations between rightsholdersand users are more flexible
and achieved more quickly than legislation, and would therefore
be in our view the preferred option.

 NO OPINION

If there are problems, how would they best be solved?

[Open question]

As mentioned in question 53, we are notaware of any problems.

If your view is that a legislative solution is needed, what
would be its main elements? Which activities should be covered
and under what conditions?

[Open question]

As mentioned in question 53, we don’t think that
legislativesolutions are needed.

If your view is that a different solution is needed, what would
it be?

[Open question]

As mentioned in question 53, in our view, negotiations between
rightsholders and users are more flexible and achieved more
quickly thanlegislation, and would therefore be in our view the
preferred option.

Are there other issues, unrelated to copyright, that constitute
barriers to the use of text or data mining methods?

[Open question] ……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

User-generated content

Technological and service developments mean that citizens can
copy, use and distribute content at little to no financial
cost. As a consequence, new types of online activities are
developing rapidly, including the making of so-called
“user-generated content”. While users can create totally
original content, they can also take one or several
pre-existing works, change something in the work(s), and upload
the result on the Internet e.g. to platformsand blogs53

A typical example could be the “kitchen” or “wedding” video
(adding one's own video to a pre-existing sound recording), or
adding one's own text to a pre-existing photograph. Other
examples are “mash-ups” (blending two sound recordings),
andreproducing parts of journalistic work (report, review etc.)
in a blog.

. User-generated content (UGC) can thus cover the modification
of pre-existing works even if the newly-generated/"uploaded"
work does not necessarily require a creative effort and results
from merely adding, subtracting or associating some pre-existing
content with other pre-existing content. This kind of activity
is not “new” as such. However, the development of social
networking and social media sites that enable users to share
contentwidely has vastly changed the scale of such activities
and increased the potential economic impact for those holding
rights in the pre-existing works. Re-use is no longer the
preserve of a technically and artistically adept elite. With
the possibilities offered by the new technologies, re-use is
open to all, at no cost. This in turn raises questions with
regard to fundamental rights such the freedom of expression and
the right to property.

A specific Working Group was set up on this issue in the
frameworkof the "Licences for Europe" stakeholder dialogue. No
consensus was reached among participating stakeholders on
either the problems to be addressed or the results or even the
definition of UGC. Nevertheless, a wide range of views were
presented as to the best way to respond to this phenomenon. One
view was to say that a new exception is needed to cover UGC, in
particular non-commercial activities by individuals such as
combining existing musical works withvideos, sequences of
photos, etc. Another view wasthat no legislative change is
needed: UGC is flourishing, and licensing schemes are
increasingly available (licence schemes concluded between
rightholders and platforms as well as micro-licences concluded
between rightholders and the users generating the content. In
any event, practical solutions to ease user-generated content
and facilitate micro-licensing for small users were pledged by
rightholders across different sectors as a result of the
“Licences for Europe” discussions54

See the document “Licencesfor Europe – ten pledges to bring more
content
online”:http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/copyright/docs/licences-for-europe/131113_ten-pledges_en.pdf.

.

(a)[In particular if you are an end user/consumer:]Have you
experienced problems when trying to use pre-existing works or
other subject matter to disseminate new content on the
Internet, including across borders?

(b)[In particular if you are a service provider:]Have you
experienced problems when users publish/disseminate new content
based on the pre-existing works or other subject-matter through
your service, including across borders?

(c)[In particular if you are a right holder:]Haveyou experienced
problems resulting from the way the users are using pre-existing
works or other subject-matter to disseminate new content on the
Internet, including across borders?

 YES – Please explain by giving examples

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO

 NO OPINION

(a)[In particular if you are an end user/consumer or a right
holder:]Have you experienced problems when trying to ensure
that the work you have created (on the basis of pre-existing
works) is properly identified for online use? Are proprietary
systems sufficient in this context?

(b)[In particular if you are a service provider:]Do you provide
possibilities for users that are publishing/disseminating the
worksthey have created (on the basis of pre-existing works)
through your service to properly identify these works for
online use?

 YES – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO – Please explain

The licensing solutions that have been developed and are being
developed through collaboration within the creative industries
ensure that the created works are properly identified. This was
demonstrated by the presentations and discussions at the LfE
meetings. SIPA does not consider that legislative intervention
is needed.

 NO OPINION

(a)[In particular if you are an end user/consumer or a right
holder):]Have you experienced problems when trying to be
remunerated for the use of the work you have created (on
thebasis of pre-existing works)?

(b)[In particular if you are a service provider:]Do you provide
remuneration schemes for users publishing/disseminating the
works they have created (on the basis of pre-existing works)
through your service?

 YES – Pleaseexplain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO – Please explain

We find it surprising that the dilemma on the topic of UGC seems
to be trying to ensure that creators of UGC receive remuneration
for their work while also ensuring that they have all the
possible flexibility to use others’ work to create their
content. In any case, marketplace agreements like the YouTube
mentioned above or the DailyMotion website show that it is
possible to ensure that creators receive fair compensation for
the use of a work created out of an existing work.

 NO OPINION

If there are problems, how would they best be solved?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

If your view is that a legislative solution is needed, what
would be its main elements? Which activities should be covered
and under what conditions?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

If your view is that a differentsolution is needed, what would
it be?

[Open question]

As mentioned in question 58 above, SIPA does not see any problem
emanating from UGC. UGC is not a new concept as such. UGCs are
derivative works and there are mechanisms in place to deal with
them (i.e. simple licensing solutions available on major
platforms/ or by way of a commercial agreement). In our view,
the authors of all “derivative works”, including UGC, must
obtain a license to use the pre-existing material. Songwriters
and those who invest intheir work (music publishers) have a
longstanding expectation that derivative works can be
monetised. There is a viable commercial marketplace in
existence for the licensing of these works, and there is no
compelling reason to grant an exception for UGC. Such an
exception would cut across the rightsholder’s ability to
license and generate revenues. There is dangerthat we are
facing an exception positioned in terms of “UGC” when really we
are talking about clear synch licensing opportunities which can
and should be managed within the licensing framework. Any
changes to the law that would allow users to make derivative
works from musical compositions without a license would have a
significant and negative impact on songwriters and music
publishers because songwriters and music publishers make the
vast majority of their living from licensing derivative works.
In addition having an exception on UGC would pose difficulties
when ensuring that moral rights are maintained. Music
publishers play a vital role in defending the rights of
creators, including moral rights. We are aware of the calls
from some sectors urging the EU to introduce a new exception
for UGC based, for example, on the US “fair use” principle.
This would simply not work in the EU. The differences between
the civil law tradition that exist in the majority of the EU
Member States and the common law approach in the US are too big
to overcome. In addition, the US “fair use” doctrine is based on
litigation and decades of case law. The EU could not just insert
the “fair use” principle from one day to the next on top of
existing exceptions as the consequent legal uncertainty would
be tremendous. The EU has an efficient copyright framework
based on specific exceptions and limitations, which together
with theThree-Step Test provide for the necessary flexibility
while ensuring sufficient legal certainty. For example, one
form of UGC is already addressed in the EU Copyright Directive
via Article 5.3(d), (i), (k) that exempts uses quotations,
incidental use, andfor the purposes of caricature, parody or
pastiche. We therefore take the view that existing exceptions
already provide for the necessary conditions to foster UGC and
that there is no (practical or economic) evidence to the
contrary. We have to assume thatthe questions relating to UGC
are focussing on those who put together or create the content.
It is in fact worth noting that the consideration of any kind
of exception relating to end users activities on this matter
cannot be seen as a way of releasing relevant ISPs from their
potential liability. As mentioned earlier, there are
increasingly more websites dedicated to the facilitation,
publishing and monetisation of UGC. The activities of these
websites go beyond merely “hosting” and therefore they are
unlikely to benefit from Article 14 of the E-Commerce Directive
to avoid liability. To conclude, the main problem that we -as
rightsholders- experience from the way the users are using
pre-existing works or other subject-matter to disseminate new
content on the Internet is piracy. The reality is that despite
the fact that there are licensing solutions to deal with UGC,
the reality is that in many cases users of UGC chose not to go
for these offers and prefer the “get it for free option”.
Therefore any measureon UGC would need to be accompanied by
effective measures on IPR enforcement. Educational measures
should also be envisaged. Time needs to be devoted to educating
consumers on the legal uses of content and on the importance of
the respect of copyright forthe creative industries and for a
culturally rich world in general.

Private copying and reprography

Directive 2001/29/EC enables Member States to implement in their
national legislation exceptions or limitations to the
reproduction right for copies madefor private use and
photocopying55

Article 5. 2)(a) and (b) of Directive 2001/29.

. Levies are charges imposed at national level on goods
typically used for such purposes (blank media, recording
equipment, photocopying machines, mobile listening devices such
as mp3/mp4 players, computers, etc.) with a view to compensating
rightholders for the harm they suffer when copies are made
without their authorisation by certaincategories of persons
(i.e. natural persons making copies for their private use) or
through use of certain technique (i.e. reprography). In that
context, levies are important for rightholders.

With the constant developments in digital technology, the
question arises as to whether the copying of files by
consumers/end-users who have purchased content online - e.g.
when a person has bought an MP3 file and goes on to store
multiple copies of that file (in her computer, her tablet and
her mobile phone) - also triggers, or should trigger, the
application of private copying levies. It is argued that,in
some cases, these levies may indeed be claimed by rightholders
whether or not the licence fee paid by the service provider
already covers copies made by the end user. This approach could
potentially lead to instances of double payments whereby levies
could be claimed on top of service providers’ licence fees56

Communication "Unleashing the Potential of Cloud Computing in
Europe", COM(2012) 529 final.

57

These issues were addressed in the recommendations of Mr António
Vitorino resulting from the mediation on private copying and
reprography levies. You can consult these recommendations on
the following
website:http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/copyright/docs/levy_reform/130131_levies-vitorino-recommendations_en.pdf.

.

There is also an on-going discussion as to the application or
not of levies to certain types of cloud-based services such as
personal lockers or personal video recorders.

In your view, is there a need to clarify at the EU level the
scope and application of the private copying and reprography
exceptions58

Art. 5.2(a) and 5.2(b) of Directive 2001/29/EC.

in the digital environment?

 YES – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO – Please explain

The Copyright Directive is sufficiently clear regarding the
scope of the exceptions and the flexibility given by the EU
framework has allowed Member States to implement itwithout
jeopardising the national legal and cultural traditions. For
example, for private copying Article 5(2) (b) of the Copyright
Directive , the corresponding recitals 35, 38, 39 and 52, the
recitals dealing with exceptions and limitations in general
(recitals 44, 45 and 52) as well as those on technical
protection measures (recitals 47, 48, 49, 50, 51 and 53).
Moreover, Article 6 paragraph 4, subparagraph 4 is
crystal-clear on the interrelation between private copying and
DRMs in case of interactive delivery of copyrighted content on
agreed contractual terms. Article 5(5), Copyright directive
enshrined the three steps test in its internationally
recognised in the Berne Convention for the Protection of
Literary and Artistic Works as well as other international and
European instruments. This principle constitutes an additional
set of conditions whose recurrence is required for any of the
exceptions to occur and has been used by the CJEU as a key
interpretative element as per the speciality of the exceptions
and limitations, the guarantee of the normal exploitation of
the works and the respect of the legitimate interest of the
rightsholder . The uniform interpretation of the private
copying and reprography exceptions is being provided by the
CJEU. Recent cases such as Padawan , Stichting de Thuiskopie v.
Opus , Austro-Mechana and VG Wort , among others, provide the
clarification needed on the scope of the application of private
copying. In addition, cases still pending before the CJEU will
provide further interpretative guidance , notably as regards
the notion of fair compensation in regards to mobile memory
cards or fair compensation for reproductions made using
different sources such as files where the use is approved by
the rightsholders and paid for by thecustomer; files where the
use in question is approved by therightsholders and not paid
for by the customer (for example marketing purposes); the
user’s own DVD, CD, MP3 player, computer, etc; where
effective technological measures are not applied, the user’s
own DVD, CD, MP3 player, computer, etc; where effective
technological measures are applied; third party’s DVD, CD, MP3
player, computer etc; unlawfully copied works from the Internet
or other sources and files copied lawfully in some other way
from, for example, the Internet (from lawful sources where no
licence has been granted, etc. The High Level Mediator Mr
Vitorino also examined and praised the role of the CJEU in his
Recommendations. In the above mentioned cases, the Court has
confirmed that in those countries where consumers are allowed
by law to make private copies of copyright protected content,
rightsholders have a right to be fairly compensated for these
reproductions. Private copying levies have been introduced in
the majority of the EU Member States as a way to guarantee this
fair compensation. In Padawan, the Court confirms that the act
of copying copyright protected content by consumers must be
considered as an act which is likely to cause harm to the
rightsholder, and consequently justifies the application of a
levy. The Court made clear that levies should be calculated
according to the assumed harm sustained by rightsholders by the
private copying in question. In Stichting de Thuiskopie vs Opus,
the Court addressed the obligation of a country that has
introduced the private copying exception to provide fair
compensation and stressed that the “harm” suffered by the
rightsholders arises on the territory where the final private
users reside. In the Austro-Mechana Case, the Court gives
guidance on practical implementation of levies both nationally
and in cross-border trade. An important step in the
interpretation of the scope of the private copying exception
will be the awaited verdict in case C-435/12 ACI Adam and
Others. The Advocate General(AG) Cruz Villalon has already
outlined the issue of the legality of the source and confirmed
that the private copying exception only applies to
reproductions made from legitimate sources.

 NO OPINION

Should digital copies made by end users for privatepurposes in
the context of a service that has been licensed by
rightholders, and where the harm to the rightholder is minimal,
be subject to private copying levies?59

This issue was also addressed in the recommendations of Mr
Antonio Vitorino resulting from the mediation on private
copying and reprography levies

 YES – Please explain

Generally, yes. However, it depends on the circumstances. If
there is no private copying under the exception, levies do not
apply either; if the exception occurs, levies generally apply
and vary according to various factors. According to the EU
Copyright Directive, if a license fee has already been paid for
the use of a service, then no additional private copying levy is
due. In our view, this criterion should not be deemed applicable
when there are two separate uses only one of which is licensed.
For example, if a consumer has purchased a TV licence, making
copies of programs is not included in such a licence, it is a
separate use stemming from a separate right from which private
copying exceptions may arise. We believe that double payment
for double use is not double payment and should not be
considered as being the instance provided for in this criterion
in the Directive.

 NO – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO OPINION

How would changes in levies with respect to the application to
online services (e.g. services based on cloud computing
allowing, for instance, users to have copies on different
devices) impactthe development and functioning of new business
models on the one hand and rightholders’ revenue on the other?

[Open question]

The reasoning behind levies is to compensate rightsholders for
the harm that is likely to arise for private copying practices
relating to musical works. Nowadays levies are hardly
“compensating” rightsholders. The levy payment is due on
devices and equipment and not in relation to specific works
being copied as it would be impossible to control the amount of
copying being carried out. This is why for publishers licensing
the reproduction of a work is always the preferred option
whenever possible, practicable and enforceable. Licensing is
also the best way to keep up-to-date with new online services
and ensure that rightsholders areremunerated fairly. As new
online services develop the possibilities for licensing
increase. However, this does not in any way mean that levies
should be eradicated. In relation to cloud computing, for
example, there is a difference between the licensing position
of the cloud service, and the devices via which such cloud
service is accessed. While cloud services should be subject to
licensing and not to a levy, the devices can be levied without
prejudice to the licensing position of the cloud service.
Consumers now have more recording devices and equipment than
ever before and therefore justification for levies subsists.
Levies should continue to exist to cover the consumer’s private
copy with a focus on the private nature of the copy. In the
digital world,private copies are “perfect clones” of the
original. Concerning the control of private copying, it seems
appropriate to distinguish between copying from an online
digital source (website) to an online digital medium (cloud
storage facility) or copying froman offline digital source (CD)
to an offline digital medium (MP3 player). Whereas the latter
act of copying is difficult to manage and would therefore fall
under the private copying exception subject to equitable
compensation, the former can easily be controlled and licensed.
In our view, there is no justification for a model of exception
if the activities are licensable and licensed. Consequently,
any new exception should not cover online digital services (be
it as a source or as a medium of the private copying)

Would you see an added value in making levies visible on the
invoices for products subject to levies?60

This issue was also addressed in the recommendations of Mr
Antonio Vitorino resulting from the mediation on private
copying and reprographylevies.

 YES – Please explain

We believe that it would be helpful to display the levy on each
invoice in the sales chain, including on the consumer's
invoice. Transparency is essential to ensure that the
appropriate levy rate is applied, that no doublepayment takes
place in case of export, that no avoidance of payment occur and
that auditing is aided. However, transparency on the levy paid
by theconsumer should not create the illusion that the final
user has acquired a right to copy using the purchaseddevice or
equipment, in all circumstances.

 NO – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO OPINION

Diverging national systems levy different products and apply
different tariffs. This results inobstacles to the free
circulation of goods and services in the Single Market. At the
same time, many Member States continue to allow the
indiscriminate application of private copying levies to all
transactions irrespective of the person to whom the
productsubject to a levy is sold (e.g. private person or
business). In that context, not all Member States have ex ante
exemption and/or ex post reimbursement schemes which could
remedy these situations and reduce the number of undue
payments61

This issue was also addressed in the recommendations of Mr
Antonio Vitorino resulting from the mediation on private
copying and reprography levies.

.

Have you experienced a situation where a cross-border
transaction resulted in undue levy payments, or duplicate
paymentsof the same levy, or other obstacles to the free
movement of goods or services?

 YES – Please specify the type of transaction and indicate
the percentage of the undue payments. Please also indicate how
a priori exemption and/or ex post reimbursement schemes could
help to remedy the situation.

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO – Please explain

Although there are indeed disparities in the methods of
calculating levy tariffs as well as disparities in equipmentand
media, the situation is well managed and under control. The CJEU
has also looked into this question in several cases. The CJEU
considers that, as per cross-borders transactions, the payment
of the levies should be done at the Member State where the
end-user resides (Stichting de Thuiskopie vs Opus point 41).
Making the end-users directly liable for the payment of the
levy with the distributor/manufacturer jointly and severally
liable will reduce the risks of double payment. The
compensation could be included in the price of the device/media
and paid only once at the time of purchase by the user. In the
Padawan decision (and confirmed by subsequent judgements) the
CJEU made clear that the harm to rightsholders is caused by the
end-user copying for his/herprivate use a protected work
(Padawan point 45 and Stichting de Thuiskopie point 26 and
Amazon paragraph 23). Nevertheless, and due to practical
difficulties in identifying private users, this does not
preclude the possibility of national systems to impose the
payment of the levy on the persons making available to the
end-user reproduction equipment or devices, since they are able
to pass on to private users the actual burden of financing the
fair compensation (Padawan point 50 and Stichting de
Thuiskopiepoint 29). The Amazon case (paragraph 37) recognizes
the legality of existing systems which indiscriminately apply
levies on the first placing on the market in national territory
for commercial purposes of recording media suitable
forreproduction while atthe same time, provides for a right to
reimbursement of the levies paid in the event that the final
use of those media does not meet the criteria set in Article
5(2). While SIPA accepts that double payment may arise in cross
border transactions, nonetheless, most EU Member States have
refund systems in place to deal with this problem. Refunds for
exports are usually set by legislation or private agreements
between CMOs and the exporters. In our view, the best way to
avoid double payment in cross border sales is that the country
where the obligation of payment of the levy should arise and
therefore the private copying rate is applicable should
continue to be the country where the sale takes place. In case
of distance sales, the country should be the one where the end
user resides. In cases where the manufacturer, importer,
distributor and retailer continue to pay the levy (and then
revert it on to the end user), existing refund systems should
be guaranteed to avoid double payment. In the Stichting de
Thuiskopie and Amazon cases , the CJEU recalls that Article
5(2)(b) imposes on Member States which have introduced the
private copying exception into its national law an obligation
to achieve a certain result, namely for the fair compensation
to be effectively paid to rightsholders residing in its
territory. In cases of distant selling, the Court established
that this obligation to compensate the rightsholder cannot be
excluded by reason of the fact that a comparable levy has been
paid in another Member State (paragraph 66). A person who has
previously paid that levy in a Member State which does not have
territorial competence may request its repayment in accordance
with its national law (paragraph 65).

 NO OPINION

What percentage of products subject to a levy issold to persons
other than natural persons for purposes clearly unrelated to
private copying? Do any of those transactions result in undue
payments? Please explain in detail the example you provide
(type of products, type of transaction, stakeholders, etc.).

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Where such undue payments arise, what percentage of trade do
they affect? To what extent could a priori exemptions and/or ex
post reimbursement schemes existing in some Member States help
to remedy the situation?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

If you have identified specific problems with the current
functioning of the levy system, how would theseproblems best be
solved?

[Open question]

Given the disparities in the national methods of calculating
levy tariffs and in the equipment and media which warrant levy
payments, we would recommend that an independent study be
commissioned to reflect the status quo regarding the products
which attract levies and the methodologies used for calculating
levies in all the various EU Member States. Followingthis,
attempts should be made at harmonising the types of devices
which attract or should attract levies andthe methods for
calculating levy tariffs, with the involvement of the relevant
stakeholders. Both should remain subject to regular reviews in
order to take account of technological developments and
evolving consumer behaviour in line with Recital 39 of theEU
Copyright Directive. For example, in Germany, the system was
changed some years ago. While previously the rate was set by
the Department of Justice (and therefore remained rather low
over the years) it is now supposed to be negotiated between
rightsholders and users. In practice, this does not work as
there is no incentive for users to come to a quick
understanding. As a result, rightsholders do not see any money
for years. This system is something that we don’t want to have
at EU level. We also believethat the EU should not move in the
direction of the various systems that are being adopted at
national level and that have nothing to do with the EU
exception envisaged in the EU Copyright Directive. We are
referring in particular to the initiatives in the UK and Spain
where the systems being introduced seem incompatible with EU
Law as they fail to provide for an appropriate system of fair
remuneration for creators and rightsholders.

Fair remuneration of authors and performers

The EU copyright acquis recognises for authors and performers a
number of exclusive rights and, in the case of performers whose
performances are fixed in phonograms, remuneration rights. There
are few provisions in the EU copyright law governing
thetransferof rights from authors orperformers to producers62

See e.g. Directive 92/100/EEC, Art.2(4)-(7).

or determining who the owner of the rights is when the work or
other subject matter is created in the context of an employment
contract63

See e.g. Art. 2.3. of Directive 2009/24/EC,Art. 4 of Directive
96/9/EC.

. This is an area that has been traditionally left for Member
States to regulate and there are significant differences in
regulatory approaches. Substantial differences also exist
between different sectors of the creative industries.

Concerns continue to be raised that authors and performers are
not adequately remunerated, in particular but not solely, as
regards online exploitation. Many consider that the economic
benefit of new forms of exploitation is not being fairly
sharedalong the whole value chain. Another commonly raised
issue concerns contractual practices, negotiation mechanisms,
presumptions of transfer of rights, buy-out clauses and the
lack of possibility to terminate contracts. Some stakeholders
are of the opinionthat rules at national level do not suffice
to improve their situation and that action at EU level is
necessary.

[In particular if you are an author/performer:] What is the best
mechanism (or combination of mechanisms) to ensure that you
receive anadequate remuneration for the exploitation of your
works and performances?

[Open question]

Creators deserve fair remuneration from their works. They also
deserve the guarantee of fair remuneration in arms-length
freely negotiated agreements with representatives within an
environment of choice. In our view the best way to ensure that
authors and composers are fairly remunerated for their work is
to have effective copyright systems and effective measures on
IPR enforcement.

Is there a need to act at the EU level (for instance to prohibit
certain clauses in contracts)?

 YES – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO – Please explain why

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO OPINION

If you consider that the current rules are not effective, what
would you suggest to address the shortcomings you identify?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Respect for rights

Directive 2004/48/EE64

Directive 2004/48/EC of the European Parliament and of the
Council of 29 April 2004 on the enforcement of intellectual
property rights.

provides for a harmonised framework for the civil enforcement
ofintellectual property rights, including copyright and related
rights. The Commission has consulted broadly on this text65

You will find more information on the following
website:http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/iprenforcement/directive/index_en.htm

. Concerns have been raised as to whether some of its provisions
are still fit to ensure a proper respect for copyright in the
digital age. On the one hand, the current measures seem to be
insufficient to deal with the new challenges brought by the
dissemination of digital content on the internet; on the other
hand, there are concerns about the current balance between
enforcement of copyright and the protection of fundamental
rights, in particular the right for a private life and data
protection. While it cannot be contested that enforcement
measures should always be available in case of infringement of
copyright, measures could be proposed to strengthen respect for
copyright when the infringed content is used for a commercial
purpose66

For example when the infringing content is offered on a website
which gets advertising revenues that depend on the volume of
traffic.

. One means to do this could be to clarify the roleof
intermediaries in the IP infrastructure67

This clarification should not affect the liability regime of
intermediary service providers established by Directive
2000/31/EC on electronic commerce, which will remain unchanged.

. At the same time, there could be clarification of the
safeguards for respect of private life and data protection for
private users.

Should the civil enforcement system in the EU be rendered more
efficient for infringements of copyright committed with a
commercial purpose?

 YES – Please explain

It is crucial that there is a high quality civil enforcement
system of Intellectual Property Rights (IPRs) in the EU
Efficiency and effectiveness of civil proceedings in cases
concerning infringements of IPRs is poor. We fear that if
copyright reform proceeds along the lines suggested in this
consultation paper, copyright infringement will either increase
or be legalised. According to our members, litigation in cases
concerning the infringement of IPRs is both costly and long and
there is theadditional difficulty of identifying and
establishing the territorial liability of the infringer. We
believe that in many cases, alternative dispute resolution
mechanisms are an effective solution. Whether they are
sufficiently accessible to the parties affected by the
infringement depends however on the different national systems.
We also don’t think that it should be more important to stop
infringements that are committed with commercial purpose (for
profit) than infringements committed not for profit. What
matters is the damage suffered by rightsholders. SIPA believes
that it would be very dangerous to draw the line between what
is considered for profit and what is considered not for profit.
In the first place a clear definition should be provided, and
the concept of potential damage to the rightsholder should be
taken into account. Due to the fact that the damage and
financial gains from piracy can be very substantial and also
difficult to ascertain, pre-established or multiple damages
could be an alternative solution to any lost profit that in
many cases would be almost impossible to prove. In this
respect, a predetermined calculation method should set a figure
which is sufficiently high to compensate the rightsholder for
the likely damage and to act as adeterrent. Furthermore,
differentiating between for profit and not for profit
infringement ignores the market impact criterion. Another area
that needs attention is civil court proceeding. The intention
when instigating civil law court proceedings concerning
infringements of IPRs is to stop the infringing activity,
dissuade the infringing behaviour, take measures to prevent
further infringements and to be compensated for the
infringements. It could be useful to establish at EU level
model rules for fast track proceedings for civil law cases
concerning IPR infringements, if the rules were to be based on
those procedures and practices carried out in the UK and
Germany. In relation to the remedies for copyright
infringement, and more specifically concerning damages and
injunctions, SIPA considers that the 2004 Enforcement
Directive, as currently implemented by different EU Member
States varies tremendously leading to lack of clarity in some.
We are particularly concerned about Article 11 on injunctions
and Article 13 on damages, where there is great inconsistency
among Member States. The following are examples of
inconsistency: Injunctions: As has been noted by the report of
the Legal Sub-Group of the European Counterfeiting and
Anti-Piracy Observatory, the conditions imposed by national law
or by jurisprudence for injunctions with respect to
intermediaries vary widely from one Member State to another. In
some Member States Article 8(3) has either not been implemented
effectively or not been implemented at all. In some Member
States it is not possible to issue injunctions unless the
liability of an intermediary is established, contrary to
Article 11 of the Enforcement Directive, as well as to Article
8(3) of the Copyright Directive, which do not link injunctions
with the liability of an intermediary. In some Member States,
national courts hold that rightsholders should seek their
remedy by taking infringement proceedings against the primary
infringers. This prevents rightsholders from obtaining relief
due to the high costs that pursuing all individual infringers
supposes. In some Member States, injunctions against
intermediaries are ineffective as they only instruct the
intermediary from allowing the exact same infringement to
happen (in practice it is quite possible that the same
infringer may engage in future infringements of the same or
different titles or products owned by the rightsholder).
Rightsholders experience significant delays in obtaining
injunctions against intermediaries. In some Member States
injunctions aimed at preventing infringement of copyright are
only available on a title-specific basis that have been adduced
in evidence. Damages: SIPA agrees with the Commission that “at
present, damages awarded in IPR casesremain comparatively low”
and “do notcurrently appear to effectively dissuade potential
infringers from engaging in illegal activities”. Indeed, unless
the Directive includes measures to enable rightsholders to
recover the full extent of their loss, including attorney’s
fees, expert costs and all costs incurred in establishing that
an infringement had been committed, including court fees and
fees payable to ISPs for providing the personal data of the
infringer, the inability to recuperate such costs would often
discourage rightsholders from pursuing legal action,
particularly small and medium sized businesses (SMEs), which
make up the vast majority of music publishers and our members.
It needs to be noted that due to the fact that the level of
damages is relatively low, parties often prefer tosettle
disputes out of court. In order to have an adequate
compensatory and deterrent effect, damages awards should be
such that they put the rightsholder in the position he or she
would have been in had the infringement not taken place; and
that they serve to discourage both repeat and would-be
infringers. Inconsistencies and differences in implementation
and interpretation of the Directive across Member States make
damages claims uncertain and costly. In some Member States, the
basis on which damages arecalculated depends on proving the
number of copies made; in others, the calculation is made on a
royalty basis; in others, the rightsholder has to prove the
actual damage suffered. Currently, national courts face
significant difficulties in calculating and awarding
compensation due to the confusion in interpreting the legal
framework and the problems with the evidence requirements that
rightsholders must meet to substantiate damages claims. The
result is that in many cases rightsholders are only compensated
for lost profits and infringers are not adequately deterred by
the current damages system. Guidelines for the calculation of
damages would be particularly useful in copyright cases. The
implementation of a statutory damages regime is required to
make civil enforcement viable. The loss of profit standard is
incredibly difficult and very costly to calculate. In some
Member States, damages are only available where infringements
are committed on a commercial scale. In others, no compensation
is awarded wherethe infringer has no knowledge of the
infringement and is only awarded for intentional or negligent
infringements. SIPA believes that there ought to be common
standards of “actual knowledge” and “awareness” as
clarification is needed to prevent further obstacles being
placed between the rightsholders and the enforcement of their
rights. In conclusion, to render the civil enforcement system
more efficient in the EU, we would ask for a cross
border/pan-European injunction system; recognition of national
judgements across borders; and liability only applies to
completely neutral hosting services (that is, a revision of the
2000 E-commerce Directive); that an injunction against a
specific service obtained in one Member State can be enforced
in another Member State, either directly or by way of an
expedited procedure. In addition, it is also key that
rightsholders have access to necessary data from the ISPs so
they can virtually identify the infringer and enforce their
rights.

 NO – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO OPINION

In particular, is the current legal framework clear enough to
allow for sufficient involvement of intermediaries (such as
Internet service providers, advertising brokers,payment service
providers, domain name registrars, etc.) in inhibiting online
copyright infringements with a commercial purpose? If not, what
measures would be useful to foster the cooperation of
intermediaries?

[Open question]

Absolutely not. The currentframework is not at all clear enough
to allow for sufficient involvement of intermediaries. It is
difficult however to answer to this question without touching
upon the liability regime of intermediary service providers
established by the E-commerce Directive, which, as the
Commission has expressed in footnote 77, will remain unchanged.
This is in our view a lost opportunity as there is clear problem
with the safe harbour provisions present in the E-commerce
Directive. These provisions have worked as a disincentive
instead of as an incentive for ISPs to cooperate. There has
been not such voluntary cooperation between ISPs and content
providers because the former have often raised their fear that
by cooperating they would lose their intermediary status and
the exemption for liability dependent on that status.
Unfortunately, the anachronisms in the wording of the safe
harbour provisions in the E-commerce Directive have an impact
on the Enforcement Directive which was framed around physical
format piracy and built on legislation such as the E-commerce
Directive. Online piracy not only appears in the traditional
hosting environment but also through P2P, cyber-lockers, etc.
In addition, many infringing websites hide behind Article 14 of
the E-Commerce Directive claiming that they are only hosting
content to avoid liability. The incentives put in place by the
EU Enforcement Directive are insufficient and need
clarification. In relation to file-sharing, it is not
practically possible to stop infringing individuals.
Cooperation with ISPs is crucial in this regard. ISPs are the
gatekeepers of the Internet. The vast majority of these ISPs
are large companies and businesses, while rightsholders tend to
be SMEs and individuals (publishers, author, compose, etc.). It
is therefore unrealistic to suppose SMEs and individuals could
possibly have the resources to deal with all unlicensed uses of
their copyrighted content across all providers. As stated in the
Commission Communication on E-commerce, the mechanisms to stop
abuses and illegal information (i.e. illegal content) should
take into account rules of proportionality. It is only common
sense that large businesses, particularly those dependant on
content for survival, should be more vigilant and take greater
responsibilitiesfor the illegal content on their services than
SMEs, simply because they are better “equipped” than SMEs and
composers to prevent illegal activities on their sites, due to
their size and turnover and because they have created a
business based on other people’s rights. It is through the
efforts of ISPs and other intermediaries, working with
rightsholders, that effective solutions can be found. Notice
and action procedures may be useful for hosting services but
not for other forms of online infringement. Steps that can be
taken are, for example, sending education messages to
subscribers whose accounts have been identified as infringing,
and warn them that refusal to stop the infringement can lead to
meaningful consequences, filtering, site-blocking, etc. The
measures above have been accepted by policy makers in different
EU Member States. Voluntary agreements between rightsholders and
ISPs are also starting to develop. However, voluntary agreements
are not the only solution as not all ISPs are willing to
cooperate, and rightsholders don’t have the means to enter into
negotiations with every single ISP. As a consequence, the most
effective way to fight theft is by legislating. The EU needs
effective rules that impose clear obligations for ISPs and
other intermediaries to cooperate in the IPR enforcement. This
should be supported by sanctions for non-compliance.

Does the current civil enforcement framework ensure that the
right balance is achieved between the right to have one’s
copyright respected and other rights such as the protection of
private life and protection of personal data?

 YES – Please explain

This question of the consultation leaves the impression that the
right balance with the right for private life and data
protection in particular is at riskdue to the current
enforcement rules. This is however inaccurate because the
balance is indeed ensured by the Enforcement Directive itself
and safeguarded by the CJEU. The Directive stipulates in
Recital 32 that “it respects the fundamental rights and
observes the principles recognised by the Charter of
Fundamental Rights of the European Union”. However,
rightsholders are encountering inconsistencies in the way in
which different EU Member States are interpreting the
relationship between the right of information and data
protection, with a number of countries interpreting legislation
in such a way as to give preference to data protection over the
right of information, and hence making difficult the
enforcement of their rights. This is true despite the rulingin
the Promusicae Case in which it was stated that EU Law requires
a fair balance to be struck between the various fundamental
rights protected by the Community legal order which include the
fundamental rights to property and to an effective remedy and
the rights protecting personal data and private life. The
ruling held that the authorities and courts of the Member
States must not only interpret their national law in a manner
consistent with the Directives but must also make sure that
they do not rely onan interpretation which would be in conflict
with those fundamental rights or with the other general
principles of Community law, such as the principle of
proportionality. In our view, when considering the right to
property and to an effective remedy, EU Member States should
take into account that rightsholders may find it difficult to
prove infringement without the information that they are
seeking under the right of information. We believe that EU
Member States should not impose a requirement that infringement
should be proved as a pre-condition for granting an order for
disclosure. The words “without prejudice” in Article 8(3) of
the EU Enforcement Directive do not mean that legislation
protecting the rights to protection of personal data should
take precedence over the right of information. Instead, and in
accordance with the Promusicae ruling, national courts should
have regard to such rights when deciding whether or not to
grant an order pursuant to the right of information. In
addition, in order to ensure that rightsholders are not
prevented from gathering evidence of online copyright
infringement, we call for confirmation that gathering and
processing IP addresses for the purposes of collecting evidence
of infringement is not contrary to EU Law (i.e. EU Directive on
the protection of individuals with regard to the processing of
personal data) and that any national laws that provide that it
is must be rectified.

 NO – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO OPINION

A single EU Copyright Title

The idea of establishing a unified EU Copyright Title has been
present in the copyright debate for quite some time now,
although views as to the merits and the feasibility ofsuch an
objective are divided. A unified EU Copyright Title would
totally harmonise the area of copyright law in the EU and
replace national laws. There would then be a single EU title
instead of a bundle of national rights. Some see this as the
only manner in which a truly Single Market for content
protected by copyright can be ensured, while others believe
that the same objective can better be achieved by establishing
a higher level of harmonisation while allowing for a certain
degree of flexibility and specificity in Member States’ legal
systems.

Should the EU pursue the establishment of a single EU Copyright
Title, as a means of establishing a consistent framework for
rights and exceptions to copyright across the EU, as well as a
single framework for enforcement?

 YES

 NO

 NO OPINION

Should this be the next step in the development of copyright in
the EU? Does the current level of difference among the Member
State legislation mean that this is a longer term project?

[Open question]

Further to ourcomments above, we do not believe that this should
necessarily be the way forward. Indeed, the Commission has been
considering this idea for quite some time now (in its 2010
Reflection Paper, “Creative Content in a European Digital
Single Market: Challenges for the Future”, the Commission
raised the question of adopting a “European Copyright Law”).
The fact that this idea has not been take up is a proof that
this supposes a huge task to undertake without the certainty
that it would bring any real advantage.

Other issues

The above questionnaire aims to provide a comprehensive
consultation on the most important matters relating to the
current EU legal framework for copyright. Should any important
matters have been omitted, we would appreciate if you could
bring them to our attention, so they can be properly addressed
in the future.

Are there any other important matters related to the EU legal
framework for copyright? Please explain and indicate how such
matters should be addressed.

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

