


Public Consultation

on the review of the EU copyright rules

Centrum Cyfrowe Projekt: Polska

SUBMISSION

Name:

Centrum Cyfrowe, Fundacja Projekt: Polska, ul. Andersa 29,
Warszawa,Poland,

http://www.centrumcyfrowe.pl

Centrum Cyfrowe Projekt:Polskaworks towards social change and
enhancing citizens’ participation through the use of digital
technologies and open, cooperative models basedon sharing
knowledge and other resources. The basis for all of our work
and projects is the idea of openness which means the
availability of resources and promoting models of cooperation
based on them. We are an institutional partner ofCreative
Commons Poland, founding member of theCommunia Association,
founding member of thePolish Coalition for Open
Educationandmember of theCopyright for Creativitycoalition.

Transparency Register ID: 642554310101-34

Type of respondent:

End user/consumer(e.g. internet user, reader, subscriber to
music or audiovisual service, researcher, student) OR
Representative of end users/consumers

for the purposes of this questionnaire normally referred to
in questions as"end users/consumers"

Institutional user(e.g. school, university, research centre,
library, archive) OR Representative of institutional users

for the purposes of this questionnaire normally referred to
in questions as"institutional users"

Other(Please explain): Public interest, non-governmental
organisation

II.Rights and the functioning of the Single Market

A.Why is it not possible to access many online content services
from anywhere in Europe?

Polish consumers for many years had restricted access to on-line
music as compared to consumers in other EU member states. The
three biggest global streaming services: Deezer, Spotify and
WiMP are present in Poland only for couple of years. Also
iTunes only recently opened its sales to Polish users.

The Polish case demonstrateshow difficult it is to gain legal
access to on-line content for consumers based in countries with
smaller revenue-generating potential for on-line businesses. The
costs of licensing are creating a significant barrier to entry
for such businesses. Any potential revenue will not compensate
the costs of the licensing process.

With respect to accessing on-line music a proposed directive on
collective rights management1

Proposal for a Directive of the European Parliament and of the
Council of 11 July 2012 on collective management of copyright
and related rights and multi-territorial licensing of rights in
musical works for online uses in the internal market, COM(2012)
372 final

may bring a change but the issue remains with respect to other
content, especially audiovisual works. The surveys (conducted
both by the Ministry of Culture and independent research
institutes) show that Polish consumers mostly watch movies and
TV series on-line, usually from unauthorized sources.

B.Do you think that further measures (legislative or
non-legislative, including market-led solutions) are needed at
EU level to increase the cross-border availability of content
services in the Single Market, while ensuring an adequate level
of protection for right holders?

As already noted the directive on collective rights management
may bring some changes for the better with respect to licensing
of musical works. Further work to unable easy licensing of
othertypes of works is needed. Also doubts remain with respect
to the functioning of the European Licensing Passport as
proposed in the directive. As Centrum Cyfrowe notes in its
submission to the consultations on the proposal for the
directive on collective rights management2

Centrum Cyfrowe Projekt: Polska (2012), The statement of the
Centrum Cyfrowe Projekt:Polska on the Proposal for a directive
of the European Commision on collective management of copyright
and related rights, URL:
https://centrumcyfrowe.pl/the-statement-of-the-centrum-cyfrowe-projektpolska-on-the-proposal-for-a-directive-of-the-european-commision-on-collective-management-of-copyright-and-related-rights/

the mechanism of the ELP is not clear on its face and the
Commission has failed to demonstrate its advantages
overwell-established Extended Collective Licensing schemes. It
remains to be seen how the ELP will function across the EU. In
the meantime there is a need to harmonize the member states
licensing and collective management policies with respect to
all types ofworks and subject matters of related rights.

However in the process the Commission should not overlook those,
who should be in the center of attention of the collective
management system – the authors and artists. In the Digital Era
the Europeancollective management system should be built in a
way that will also take the works of individual Internet users
into account. Any proposal should include a mechanism that will
allow such users-creators’ actual participation in the system
and ability to acquire financial gains from such on-line
creativity. We write more on the issus in item… below.

C.Is there a need for more clarity as regards the scope of what
needs to be authorised (or not) in digital transmissions?[The
definition of the rights involved in digital
transmissions]1.The act of “making available”

Making available right is a big “unknown”. It is hard to
understand how it differs from the right of communication to
the public and when it takes place.

This view is confirmed by the “Study on the application of
Directive 2001/29/EC on copyright and related rights in the
information society”3

Triaille, J-P., Dusollier, S., Depreeuw, S., Hubin, J-B.,
Coppens, F., de Francquen, A. (2013). Study on the Application
of Directive 2001/29/EC on Copyright and Related Rights in the
Information Society (the “InfoSoc Directive”).De Wolf &
Partners. Available at,
http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/copyright/docs/studies/131216_study_en.pdf.

, prepared by Belgian law firm De Wolf & Partners at the request
of the European Commission (the “Study”).

The Study4

Triaille, J-P., et. al.(2013). Ibid. p. 176-177.

notes that:

“The absence of a definition of the making available right
creates some legal uncertainty as to the territorial reach of
the online accessibility of protected subject matter. Different
elements of this complex act could be considered relevant to
establish the application of the national right of making
available to the public: the availability on a server or the
transmission to a Member State, even accessibility of the work
has not explicitly been ruled out as a relevant element for the
making available right. Consequently if all Member States are
free to determine which element of the complex act is relevant
to establish an act of making available, then each could
subject this constitutive part to the prior authorisation of
the author (and to the corresponding payment of a licence
fee).”

We believe that he country of origin approach should be
introduced as it has already been tested with respect to
broadcasts in the Satellite and Cable Directive.

2.Two acts involved in a signle act of exploitation

Each act of transmission in digital networks entails (in the
current state of technology and law) several reproductions.
This means that there are two rights that apply to digital
transmissions: the reproduction right and the making available
right. This may complicate the licensing of works for online
use notably when the two rights are held by different
persons/entities.

The issue is even more complex than in the Commission’s
introduction above. The two rights apply to the act of
uploading and to the act of downloading and both those acts are
usually performed by different entities requiring different
licenses. This is absurd and unnecessary. Such multiplication
of rights overly complicates digital uses and dissemination of
works.

We believe that there is room for legislation to achieve the
"bundling of rights".

3.Linking and browsing

The provision of a hyperlink leading to a work or other subject
matter protected by copyright should under no circumstances be
subject to the authorisation of the right-holder. Hyperlinking
is a modern referencingtool communicating the online addresses
of works, not the works themselves. Hyperlinking is also at the
heart of both publishing on the Web and using Web content. Any
uncertainty to the legality of such action, or legal barriers
to free use of hyperlinks,will cause prohibitive transaction
costs for all Web-based activity.

Unfortunately the recent Court of Justice ruling in the Svensson
case5

Court of Justice of the European Union. (2014, 13 Feb). Judgment
of the Court (Fourth Chamber). 13 February 2014.In Case
C‑466/12. Available at
http://curia.europa.eu/juris/document/document.jsf?text=&docid=147847&pageIndex=0&doclang=en&mode=lst&dir=&occ=first&part=1&cid=29226

is not that clear. The court did not rule that hyperlinking
falls outside the copyright protection. It considered it
communication to the public but the additional factor is to
assess whether it entails any “new” public. In the case of
hyperlinks to already available works there is no such “new”
public. Such reasoning creates new uncertainties with respect
of legality of hyperlinking.

Hyperlinks are reference to data and they merely lead Internet
users from one page to another. Centrum Cyfrowe believes that
it should be make clear that hyperlinking falls outside of the
copyright protection. Wewould like to point to the opinion of
the European Copyright Society in the Svensson case6

European Copyright Society. (2013, February).Opinion on the
Reference to the CJEU in Case C-466/12 Svenssson. Available
at,http://www.ivir.nl/news/European_Copyright_Society_Opinion_on_Svensson.pdf.

, which concludes that hyperlinking is not covered by copyright
protection because it is outside the scope of the right of
communication enshrined in Article 3 of the InfoSoc Directive.

Likewise the viewing of a Web page should not require any
authorization from the rightholder.

The viewing of a Web page is covered by the citizens’
fundamental right to information. It is nothing more than the
right to read. Posing such a question is asking whether the
Internet is legal.7

Angelopoulos, C. (2013, 8 July).UK Supreme Court Asks CJEU
Whether the Internet is Legal. Kluwer Copyright Blog. Available
at,
http://kluwercopyrightblog.com/2013/07/08/uk-supreme-court-asks-cjeu-whether-the-internet-is-legal/

4.Download to own digital content

The question posed by the Commission relates to the
permissibility of the second-hand sale of downloaded files.

The question misses the issue. In the digital word when a person
buys a work she always buys a digital copy of that work that
cannot be compared to apaper copy. The digital copy may be
shared with family and friends multiple times and it does not
wear down. Internet makes clearthe distinction made by
economists between private and public goods. The latter are in
constant supply and cannot be exhausted. Thus a more complex
solution than the exhaustion of rights in one copy of the work
should be applied.

Centrum Cyfrowe shares the view of La Quadrature du Net that “if
the second-hand resale of files were allowed, it would lead to
several harmful developments. Any system of resale would use
DRM systems which ignore the basic rights of individuals to the
cultural content they own. Moreover, music industry giants […]
are already positioning themselves for this market opportunity
in such a way that would reinforce, using patents and other
means, their vertical integration and lock users into their
systems.”8

https://www.laquadrature.net/files/La_Quadrature_du_Net_s_response_to_the_European_Commission_s_consultation_on_copyright_reform.pdf

D. Registration ofworks and other subject matter – is it a good
idea?

As the Commission notes registration is not often discussed in
relation to copyright in the EU as the existing international
treaties in the area prohibit formalities as a condition for
the protectionand exercise of rights. However, this prohibition
is not absolute9

For example, it does not affect “domestic” works – i.e. works
originating in the country imposing the formalities as opposed
to works originating in another country.

. Moreover a system ofregistration does not need to be made
compulsory or constitute a precondition for the protection and
exercise of rights. We believe the EU could provide strong
incentives for the ownership of works to be better and more
fully documented at the EU level. It could for instance require
that collecting societies do not enforce rights which are not
documented in a public database10

As is the case in the USA.

. It could also limit the availability of remedies when works
are not registered, such as certain enforcement remedies, take
downs notifications or the protection of TPM.

The advantages of a registration system are noted by WIPO in a
Copyright Registration and Documentation study.11

WIPO. (n.d.). Copyright Registration and Documentation.
Available at,
http://www.wipo.int/copyright/en/activities/copyright_registration/

E. How to improve the use and interoperability of identifiers

In its capacity of the Polish partner of Creative Commons
Centrum Cyfrowe deeply believes in identifiers as a great tool
fortracking works on-line.

From that perspective we believe that the European Union should
ensure that:

1)identifiers as well as rights ownership and permission
databases are based on open standards, available to all content
creators and able to be readby all market participants free of
charge, as well as ensuring they are publicly accessible via
machine readable interfaces; and

2)identifiers as well as rights ownership and permission
databases are interoperable across all of Europe (and beyond).

F.Term of protection – is it appropriate?

The current terms of protection are excessive.

Centrum Cyfrowe is a founding member of Communia Association and
fully supports Communia Association Public Domain Manifesto
which in its relevant part states that :

“The term of copyright protection should bereduced. The
excessive length of copyright protection combined with an
absence of formalities is highly detrimental to the
accessibility of our shared knowledge and culture. Moreover, it
increases the occurrence of orphan works, works that are neither
under the control of their authors nor part of the Public
Domain, and in either case cannot be used. Thus, for new works
the duration of copyright protection should be reduced to a
more reasonable term”.

We believe that such reasonable term should be no more than25
years from the first publication.

In this context it is ironic that inventors would need to
undergo lengthy and costly proceedings to file a patent
application and in the end they are granted 25 years of
exclusive patent rights while authors may do nothing and claim
exclusive rights until their deaths and 70 years thereafter to
the benefit their heirs.

As the case of the US shows shorter term of protection (prior to
so called Sonny Bono Act, the term of protection was 50 years)
combined with the registration requirement (present until the
1970s) saved the US 20thcentury works from falling into “20th
century black hole” that exists with respect to European works.

III. Limitations and exceptions in theSingle Market

There is a need for clarity with respect to exceptions and
limitations. As the Internet knows no boundaries, also the L&Es
should have no territorial restrictions or differences.

Studies conducted in various countries show that consumers
aredisoriented when asked about the limits of copyrights. A
survey conducted in the UK shows that over 70 % of usersare
never quite sure what is legal and illegal under current
copyright law.12

Consumer Focus. (2011, March). Consumer Focus Response to
Independent Review of IP and Growth. Part 2 – The Copyright
Framework: Innovation and Growth through Fair Use, Licensing
Solutions and Appropriate Enforcement. p. 15. Available at,
http://www.consumerfocus.org.uk/files/2009/06/Response-to-independent-review-of-IP-and-Growth-Part-2-fair-use-licensing-solutions-and-appropriate-enforcement.pdf.pdf.

The same applies to Polish consumers. A survey conducted in 2013
by our organization13

Danielewicz, M, Tarkowski, A. “Copyright Law in Transition. On
Social Norms related to Content Usage” p. 6

finds that they are equally as the UK consumers confused when it
comes to legality of their actions. The table below shows
selected respondents’ opinions with respect to a few actions
that are legal under the Polish Copyright Act (they fall into
relevant exceptions from copyright).

ACTION

RESPONSES

Believed to be legal

Believed to be illegal

John copied a CD and gave the copy to his colleague at work

(private use/copying exception)

20,9%

64,9%

Agnes copied an entire bookthat she borrowed from a library

(private copying exception)

35,3%

46,9%

Teresa, a school teacher, screened a movie about World War II in
her classroom

(teaching exception)

25,8%

51,2%

The surprising outcome of the survey is that people usually
assumethat copyright is more restrictive than it actually is.
People consider many acts illegal under the copyright but still
they commit them - and in reality do not commit a crime. This
leads us to question any strategy of further restricting the
copyright with the view of making it effective.

On the contrary, more clarity and flexibility should be allowed
- in particular, with regard to online uses of digital content,
including transformative uses. Today, ubiquituous use of the
Internet and other digital communication technologies in Europe
is radically different from the state of affairs at the
beginning of the XXth century, when the current exceptions and
limitations regime in Europe has been defined. In the Internet
era, the “exception by exception” reasoning adopted by the
Directive should not be applied any more. We believe that this
is the time to seriously consider the suggestion put forward in
the Study and “to look at different uses some categories of
users (libraries or educational institutions) orsome objectives
(access to knowledge and education) would be privileged to
undertake under the limitations to copyright. […] the space of
non-infringing uses could be defined by their objective and
some general conditions, including a more open requirementthat
the use does not exceed what is necessary for its objective.
[…] It could make our system more fit for its purpose and
more understandable for users and owners alike.”14

Triaille, J-P., Dusollier, S., Depreeuw, S., Hubin, J-B.,
Coppens, F., de Francquen, A. (2013). Study on the Application
of Directive 2001/29/EC on Copyright and Related Rights in the
Information Society (the “InfoSoc Directive”). De Wolf &
Partners. Available at,
http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/copyright/docs/studies/131216_study_en.pdf,
p. 403

We do not advocate for the introduction of a general open norm
of “fair use” into the European acquis. Rather we are of the
opinion that key exceptions relating to fundamental rights
(information, communication, education, research) should be
drafted following the above mentioned recommendations and based
on a revised current list of exceptions. Then they should be
made mandatory for all member states. Additionally, a fair
amount of flexibility should be left to national courts to be
ableto adapt the existing limitations and possibly create new
ones - similar to those that already exist - in order to keep
up with the progress of technology.

We believe that a specific exceptions allowing for
non-commercial file-sharing and transformative uses should be
introduced with its objective in mind to serve the fundamental
rights of access to information and communication. Both of
exceptions would make legal activities that are today common,
and at the same time fall into a “grey zone” of uncertaintywith
regard to their legal status.

It is also necessary to ensure that access to works and usage
rights under relevant limitations and exceptions are not
contractually restricted or limited by TPMs. The law should
expressly prohibit such legal or technical restrictions.

Special care should be given to the clear and precise
formulation of any exceptions and limitations. In the absence
of clear guidance in the law, the temptation is big for
rightholders to determine the extent of lawful uses exclusively
through contractual arrangements, which restrict the acts
normally allowed under the statutory exceptions and
limitations.15

Guibault, L. (2010). Why Cherry-Picking Never Leads to
Harmonisation. The Case of the Limitations on Copyright under
Directive 2001/29/EC. JIPITEC, 1(2). pp. 55-66. p.65. Available
at,
http://www.jipitec.eu/issues/jipitec-1-2-2010/2603/JIPITEC%202%20-%20Guibault-Cherrypicking.pdf.pdf.

We should also note that the Polish exceptions and limitations
are broad and fairly flexible as compared with other member
states’ copyright regimes. For example, the teaching exception
does extend to all uses of all kind of works and the private
use exception allows for all kinds of private use of works
communicated to the public.

While we strongly support the notion of the EU copyright reform
, we will oppose any proposals that could lead to restrictions
on the rights of Polish citizens as set forth in the Polish
Copyright Act.

A. Access to content in libraries and archives

In 2012, Centrum Cyfrowe in partnership with eIFL conducted a
research project with the aim to propose amendments to the
Polish Copyright Act that would be favourable to libraries,
which function in the new digital environment16

Siewicz, K, Legal Analysis of the Copyright Rulesregarding
Libraries, Centrum Cyfrowe Projekt:Polska
http://centrumcyfrowe.pl/czytelnia/przepisy-dla-bibliotek/ [in
Polish]

. During a series of workshops librarians pointed out to the
major problems faced by libraries in the 21st century. Those
include:

Licensing agreements prevent exercise of the libraries’ rights
as per relevant exceptions.

Libraries cannot digitize its collections and put them on-line
due to licensing issues while hard copies due to their poor
conditions cannot be lent to the public.

Current exception limiting access to collections for scientific
or research purposes to dedicated terminals on the premises of
libraries is outdated.

There are significant doubts whether e-lending is permitted.

Permissibility of inter-library e-loans

E-booktitles available for sale to the public are not available
to libraries for acquisition and access;

If they are available they are available sometime after
publication and not at the time of publication;

Publishers do not deliver e-books and other electronic materials
in interoperable formats or deliver the materials protected by
restrictive TPMs.

The above problems are shared by libraries and archives across
the EU. They are also partially applicable to other cultural
heritage institutions such as museums and publicly accessible
galleries. We believe that these issues need to be addressed in
the current revision of the copyright system.

Mass digitisation

We address the mass digitization issue separately as this is the
major concern of Polish librariesand museums. Centrum Cyfrowe
has assisted a Polish regional institution (Małopolski Instytut
Kultury)in its large scale digitisation project involving
collections of 35 museums ofMałopolska region in Poland
(http://muzea.malopolska.pl/en/). We also advised the National
Art GalleryZachetain its projectOpen
Zacheta(http://www.otwartazacheta.pl/?lang=eng). In addition,
Centrum Cyfrowe carried out the digitization of the archives of
a regional office for protection of monuments.

The main conclusion derived from those projects is that mass
digitisation of collections (resulting in making them available
on-line) requires a comprehensive approach that cannot be based
on the principles of diligent search and licensing. Those are
overly burdensome and time-consuming requirements.

Both the Orphan Works Directive and the 2011 Memorandum of
Understanding on out of commerce works are insufficient to
address the copyright issues arising from mass
digitisationprojects. In Poland there is yet no project
inspired bythe MoU and the Orphan Works Directive has not been
implemented.

However, it has already been raised by Centrum Cyfrowe’s partner
institutions that the diligent search requirement of the Orphan
Works Directive involves substantial investments of time and
money that the institutions cannot handle. Thus it makes the
directive unusable in mass-digitisation projects such as the
one involving digitisation of the collection of the Polish
National Library. For instance, among other items, the
collection contains a large number of copies of Polish press
from the time of the Nazi occupation of Poland that was
sponsored and published by the occupants17

In Polish: “gadzinówki”.

. The editors and authors were deemed collaborators by the
Polish Underground State Government (Government in Exile).
Obviously they are not eager to come forward in the National
Library‘s search and claim rights in the articles they then
wrote. There are fair chances however, that they nevertheless
cannot be ignored under the diligent search requirement, and
that they are still alive, living abroad often as far as New
Zealand or Australia. This example has been put forward by the
Polish National Library as the best illustration of
difficulties relating to diligent searches.

The inadequacies of both the Orphan Works Directive as well as
the MoU may be addressed, as outlined above in the general
remarks on the L&Es, by an introduction ofan objective driven
exceptionfor cultural heritage institutions that would allow
them to realize theirmission of preservation and dissemination
of cultural works. If such a move would prove too radical we
recommend an extension of the scope of the exception created by
Article 5(2)(c) of the Directive to cover all types of
reproduction and an extension ofthe exception defined in
Article 5(3)(n) of the Directive to allow for a remote on-line
access to digitized library collections.

There is also a need for a new exception covering e-lending,
since it is currently unclear whether e-lending is permissible
under Directive 2006/115/EC on lending and rental rights.

B. Teaching18

Please note that the submission of Centrum Cyfrowe in this
section on teaching and the following section on research
mirrors the submission of C4C Coalition, as Centrum Cyfrowe was
the leading contributor of the part in the Coalition’s
submission.

The current exception for teaching in the EU law is written in a
rather broad and open way, but none of the EU countries have
implemented it as broadly as allowed by the Directive.

For example,according to the Polish implementation of the
Directive, there is no legal certaintyas regards the use of
works for teaching purposes in any manner except for authorised
physical copies on-site. In other words, on-line access is open
to question, given the limitation of use that falls under
exception to on-site terminals, which applies also to schools.
Therefore, many educational institutions do not engage in any
activities except for traditional on-site teaching, or they
seek explicit licenses. At the same time, many teachers who
want to make their classes more attractive and to prepare their
students to the use of ICT, operate in a grey area (and are
often not aware of rights that they have under educational
exceptions, as proven by our research).

If implemented broadly into the national laws the exception
allows for use of any copyrighted material, including text,
film, and multimedia for illustration of teaching in classrooms
and also in online courses. It should also allow for using
copyrighted works in teaching compilations, analogue or
digital. Such uses should not require a license. Compensation
is not required but allowed and compensation schemes should be
based on actual and proven economic harm. Because of the narrow
implementations of the broad exception provided in the
Directive, permitted use of works in education differs between
Member States. This presents special difficulties for the
providers of online courses (such as MOOCs) that can be
accessed by citizens of various Member States and anyother
cross boarder educational initiatives.

The issue not only concerns the types of uses permissible under
specific Member States’ educational exceptions but also the
applicable law aspect, as highlighted in our answer regarding
the ‘act of making available’ and its consequences in terms of
the definition of the applicable law.

There is thus a need to seek harmonised solutions, if not at
international then at least at EU level, in order to create a
real single market, without the current fragmentation
weexperience. Otherwise legal uncertainty will govern on both
sides, with the absurd results we see today: the educational
institutions will continue to seek licenses for uses that do
not need to be licensed (and maybe they will be refused) and
the rightholders will be reluctant to grant license for online
uses.

The end result is what we face today, i.e. an uncertain climate
for public policy for education, as core matters are left to
market forces (in the form of unreasonable prices and
conditions, prohibition to use material online, technical
protection measures and restrictive licensingconditions in
general).19

Papadopoulou, M. D. (2010). Copyright Limitations and Exceptions
in an E-Education Environment. European Journal of Law and
Technology, 1(2).Available at,
http://ejlt.org/article/view/38/56.

Existing mechanisms that are meant to faciliate use of content
for teaching purposes mainly involve extensive collective
licensing or agreements with publishers at national level. For
example, universitiesin Spain pay to collecting societies a
flat fee of 5 euro per student to allow reproduction and online
uses of works for teaching purposes.

In France, the works are licensed under special agreements with
collecting societies and in Finlandworks are licensed under
collective licensing schemes. These mechanisms often create
legal uncertainty for educational institutions, which always
run the risk of not reaching an agreement necessary for some
important usage right. They also further fragment the allowed
uses of works for educational purposes across Member States.
Furthermore, educational institutions sometimes end up seeking
licenses for uses that do not require to be licensed, and on
the other hand, certain rightholders prohibit certain permitted
uses byemploying technical protection measures (TPMs) or
imposing restrictive contractual clauses.

To solve the problems we believe a legislative solution at the
EU level is needed.

The exception needs to be made fully mandatory, to ensure
educators in all MemberStates can benefit from it to its full
extent.

It should also be made explicitly possible for anyone to make
works available on-line for educational purposes without
restriction to on-site terminals, both in original form, as
well as in the form of an adaptation or compilation, both in
analogue and digital form. In this manner, the exception should
be technologically neutral and cover both traditional,
face-to-face, in classroom education, as well as online
education.

Moreover, the educational exception should explicitly cover all
acts of exploitation of all types of works for illustration of
teaching, including text, film, and multimedia for illustration
of teaching in classrooms as well as in distance learning
(including transformative uses for teachingpurposes). It should
not be limited to any types of institution but rather defined by
its purpose: teaching. The same is true as regards the source of
financing: the exception should apply regardless of the source
of financing of an educational institution– public or private –
as long as the purpose is non-commercial.

The no license and no compensation model also seems the most
appropriate one. Under this model, the uses for illustration of
teaching should not require the consent (license) nor
anyremuneration to rightholders. Should fair compensation
however be required, notably due to the application of the
three-step test if there is evidence of actual harm, and in a
cross-border context (e.g.e-learning) then the ‘country of
origin’ principle should apply, and the educational institution
located in the country where the uploading of the educational
materials takes place should pay a fair remuneration, which
should in turn be fairly distributed. This is similar to the
country of origin principle in the Satellite and Cable
Directive (93/83/EEC), which has been functioning for close to
a decade and has induced a substantial body of case law.

Moreover, there is also need for education and wide
dissemination of information about the scope of the existing
and any future exceptions. Centrum Cyfrowe conducted a series
of workshops for the Polish educators (school and academia
teachers) on the issue of the current educational exception.20

Siewicz,, K. „Analysis of Copyright Rules Relating to
Education”, Centrum Cyfrowe Projekt Polska, at:
http://centrumcyfrowe.pl/czytelnia/przepisy-dla-oswiaty/ [in
Polish]

The school teachers involved demonstrated hardly no knowledge of
the existence of the educational exception. For instance they
were afraid of the legal consequences of showing movies in
classrooms, even though this is a clearly allowed under the
Polish teaching exception.

This corroborates the findings of the Hargreaves report21

Hargreaves, I. (2011, May). Digital Opportunity: A Review of
Intellectual Property andGrowth. p. 41. Available at,
http://www.ipo.gov.uk/ipreview-finalreport.pdf.

, which noted that:

“Many university academics – along with teachers elsewhere in
the education sector – are uncertain what copyright permits for
themselves and their students. Administrators spend substantial
sums of public money to entitle academics and research students
to access works which have often been produced at public expense
by academics and research students in the first place.(…)Senior
figures and institutions in the university sector have told the
Review of the urgent need reform copyright to realise
opportunities, and to make it clear what researchers and
educators are allowed to do.”

C.Research

Currently research activities are covered by the same exception
aseducational uses. It is therefore a broad provision. The type
of research institution is not relevant: it may be publicly
funded or private as long as the research itself is
non-commercial.

Contrary to the educational exception, the exception for
researchis not restrictively adopted innational laws. However,
the main problems with accessing and using scientific materials
are mainly practical. The exception allows for their use for
research purposes, but they are usually protected by
restrictive licenses or technical protection measures (TPMs) –
or simply only published in hard copies and not accessible. For
example, licenses require that works are made available using
certain networks or software only. Also, text and data mining
(TDM) is often explicitly prohibited in licenses, or allowed
only to a limited extent.

The main problems are the lack of access to scientific material
due to prohibitive licensing and/or technical protection
measures (TPMs).

A twin track approach seems most appropriate.

On the one hand, a legislative track should be pursued whereby a
specific exception for research should be introduced, that is
both mandatory and with a clear scope. Indeed, the current
‘voluntary’ approach to the list of exceptions leads to legal
uncertainty and abuse by some rightholders.

Once again, the approach should be purpose-driven,i.e.the
exception should not apply to particular beneficiaries but be
defined by its purpose: conducting research. It should extend
to works, subject matters of related rights, computer programs
and databases. The uses allowed for research should not be
limited by way of illustration and should cover a wide range of
possibilities in order to enable unrestricted digital research.
Scientists should be free to subject any article published or
made available online to data mining, extractions, variations
or other digital manipulations provided they give proper
attribution. The exception should cover commercial and
non-commercial activities. If deemed necessary, uses for the
purpose of commercial research could be subject to fair
compensation but the levies should be low and well
administered. However, under this option, guidelines on the
meaning of commercial should be provided by EU legislation.

As should be the case for all exceptions and limitations, it
should be clearly stated by in the legislation that contractual
or technical (TPM) overrides of this exception are prohibited.

C4C reminds the European Commission that the legislative
approach outlined above has been proposed and substantiated by
the Max Planck Institute for Intellectual Property, Competition
and Tax Law in its response to the ‘Green Paper Copyright in the
Knowledge Economy’consultations in 200822

Hilty, R. M., et al.(2008). European Commission – Green Paper:
Copyrightin the Knowledge Economy – Comments by the Max Planck
Institute for Intellectual Property, Competition and Tax Law.
Max Planck Institute for Intellectual Property, Competition &
Tax Law Research Paper Series No. 08-05. Available at,
http://www.ip.mpg.de/files/pdf1/Comments-GreenPaperCopyrigthKnowledgeEconomy4.pdf.

and further defined and supported by Reichman and Okediji.23

Reichman, J. H., & Okediji, R. L. (2009, 5 April).Empowering
Digitally Integrated Scientific Research: The Pivotal Role of
CopyrightLaw’s Limitations and Exceptions. Available at,
http://policydialogue.org/files/events/Reichman_Okediji_Empowering_Digitally_Integrated_Scientific_Research.pdf.

Apart from this legislative solution, the access problems could
also in part be solved by promoting and implementing open
access principles. As recommended by the Commission itself24

European Commission. (2012, 17 July). Commission Recommendation
of 17.7.2012 on Access to and Preservation of Scientific
Information (C(2012) 4890 final). Brussels, Belgium. Available
at,
http://ec.europa.eu/research/science-society/document_library/pdf_06/recommendation-access-and-preservation-scientific-information_en.pdf.

, the results of publicly funded research project should be
published in open access models. TheCommission should further
promote and encourage open access models, notably in its
Horizon 2020 research framework programme.

Finally, there is also a need to promote among researchers and
publishers data awareness and a culture of sharing. This could
notably be done by establishing mechanisms and processes to
recognise and reward and even require good data sharing
practices.

D.Disabilities

At present, persons with disabilities – in particular the
visually impaired, deaf , dyslexic and other print
disabledpersons – in the EU and globally, only have access to a
very small fraction of the reading material published each year.

This situation is especially limited with regards to the cross
border shipment or exchange of accessible formats for persons
with disabilities given that Member States and International
law up until now does not allow the legal cross border exchange
of reading content among institutions and organisations that
serve the cultural and academic needs of persons with
disabilities.

The ratification and effective implementation by the EU and its
Member States of the World Intellectual Property Organisation
(WIPO) Marrakech Treaty25

WIPO. (2013). Marrakesh Treaty to Facilitate Access to Published
Works for Persons Who Are Blind, Visually Impaired, or Otherwise
Print Disabled, adopted by the Diplomatic Conference to Conclude
a Treaty to Facilitate Access to Published Works by Visually
Impaired Persons and Persons with Print Disabilities in
Marrakesh, on June 27, 2013. Available at,
http://www.wipo.int/treaties/en/text.jsp?file_id=301016.

could overcome much of thisproblem for visually impaired
persons, but these exceptions and limitations to copyright
should also be extended to person with other disabilities.

E.Text and data mining

Centrum Cyfroweparticipated in Working Group 4 concerning TDM
within “Licenses for Europe” and was among those stakeholders
who withdrew from the process protesting against licensing
solutions offered by publishers and enhanced by the Commission.
60 organizations signed an open letter to the Commission arguing
that no additional licence should be required to mine material
to which access has been provided through a subscription
agreement and considered that a specific exception for text and
data mining should be introduced.26

The text of the letter is available at:
http://www.libereurope.eu/news/licences-for-europe-a-stakeholder-dialogue-text-and-data-mining-for-scientific-research-purpose

Centrum Cyfrowe believes that is not clear whether in fact TDM
activities maytrigger any copyright protection. It can be
argued that TDM merely involves extracting from existing
materials new information or data, which fall outside of the
scope of the subject matter of copyright.

That could be true if TDM would not require copyingof the
explored materials. Thus clearly being subject to authorization
of a rightholder. We believe that any reproductions for the
purposes of TDM could be covered by the broad research
exception as the exception allows for all kind of uses of works
forthe purpose of non-commercial research

In order to clarify the issues a specific exception allowing the
copying of content for the purpose of text and data mining is
necessary. It should also be explicitly stated in the law that
technical protectionmeasures (TPMs) and contracts should not
override such an exception. Finally, such an exception should
not distinguish between commercial and non-commercial purposes
as, for research institutions, this would prevent knowledge
transfer and such a differentiation would be contrary to the
public interest.

F.User-generated content

Many Poles remember a video remix of Euro 2012 football [soccer]
games created by an Internet user, nicknamed Madas. Madas
created the short (just over one minute long) movieentitled
“The Game for Everything” prior to Poland-Czech Republic game
during Euro 201227

The movie has been reinstated to youtube after euro 2012:
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=imZmLNbb-lE

. The movie’s aim was (as Madas later told the press) to cheer
up Polish football fans and give them hope. If the Polish team
had won they could have stayed in play. Thousands of people
watched the movie on youtube and praised Madas for it but only
for one day. Thereafter it was blocked at the request of the
Polish public broadcasters who claimed that the movie infringed
their exclusive rights to broadcasts. Warsaw Film School offered
a scholarship to Madas to cover the fees of a three-year film
editing course. The dean of the school commented to the press:
“We think that ifsomeone creates a movie like that, that can
move people and that thousands of people watch it, then he is
very talented and has all the skills that film creators should
have”28

The interview with the dean of Warsaw Film School is available
in Polish at:
http://wiadomosci.gazeta.pl/wiadomosci/1,114873,11945435,_Mecz_o_wszystko___Madas__zglos_sie__Dostales_stypendium.html

.

The above story serves as a perfect example of social value and
importance of on-line creativity. It also proves how easily it
isblocked by exclusive rights. Moreover it shows that any
differentiation between creativity of a “real artist” and an
Internet user is unjustified. The content created by them can
have the same creative and social values.

We therefore consider on-line creativity as such. As majority of
on-line works is created with the use of other works or their
fragments (remixes, mash-ups) from the copyright view point we
need to concentrate on the adaptation right and its scope. The
adaptation right is not subject matter of the Directive and has
not been harmonized thus allowing for much flexibility to member
states to regulate transformative uses.29

See also Hugenholtz, B., Senftleben, M. “Fair Use in Europe. In
Search of Flexibilities”, IViR, Amsterdam 2011

Therefore treatment of a transformative use will depend on the
copyright rules of a given member state. In Poland the
copyright makes a distinction between a work that is merely
inspired by an original work and an adaptation. Copyright in
inspired works belongsto their authors and may be exercised
without any permissions from authors of original works. In
contract, exercise of economic rights in an adaptation requires
the permission (license) of anauthor of the original while the
moral rights to the adaptation vest in its author. In other
words, under the Polish law, adaptions are unrestricted as long
as an author keeps them in a drawer. As shown by the
introductory case, such rules are of no help to Internet
creativity.

As noted in item II above a broad exception should be proposed
to allow for non-commercial adaptations and their sharing
on-line.

IV.Private copying and reprography

In Poland private copying levies are imposed on blank media,
recording equipment, photocopying machines, MP3 players,
computer hard drives. They are also charged as a percentage of
revenues from the photocopying shops. The collective management
organizations argue that the list should be expanded to include
digital cameras and smartphones.

The consumers have no awareness that the levies are being
charged and affect the prizes of many electronic goods. For the
reason of boosting consumers awareness in this respect it is
advisable to show the amount of levies charged on the invoices
and receipts. The levies are charged bya few collective
management organizations which are having difficulties with
adequate re-distribution to entitled rigthholder. The financial
reports of the Polish CMOs show that at the end of the year 2012
the collected amount of close to 1 billion Polishzlotys have
still not been re-distributed.

We strongly oppose introduction of any other levies given the
current, flawed system of their re-distribution to authors. Any
such legislative move should be based on economic evidence and
analysis that the circulation, including digital coping of
content, for private uses causes actual harm to the
rightholders.

The evidence to that end is still missing. On contrary surveys
show that making content available for non-commercial uses
on-line may enhances sales in the real world. For instance
Centrum Cyfrowe’s research “Circulation of Culture. On Social
Circulation of Content” shows that people who download music or
movies from the Internet are also the largest group of customers
of record stores and cinemas.30

Filiciak, M. Hofmokl, J. Tarkowski A. “Circulation of Culture.
On Social Circulation of Content,” available in English at
http://obiegikultury.centrumcyfrowe.pl/en/

Even if any loss to the rigthsholders is evidenced it still
should be assessed if it would make sense in recovering this
loss through levies, having in mind the bureaucracy of the
system and administrative costs charged by the CMOs.

V.Fair remuneration of authors and performers

Authors and performers are entitled to fair remunerationfor
commercial uses of their works. As noted, there should be made
no distinction between works created/adapted with the use of
on-line content and re-posted on-line (“on-line creativity”)
and any other works as long as they fall under the scope of
copyright protection.

On-line creativity should be treated equally with entertainment
industry based (“professional”) creativity in business models
that are employed to calculate and re-distribute revenues
generated by on-line use of works (such as google ID). Works of
individuals cannot be treated in a discriminatory manner in such
models.

Centrum Cyfrowe has remained skeptical with respect to many
proposed legislative solutions regarding Internet flat rate
fees or other levies that would be aimed atcompensating the
authors and artists’ losses incurred due to free circulation
and sharing of their works on-line.31

Compare: Fisher, T. Promises to Keep. Technology, Law and the
Future of Entertainment, Stanford University Press, 2004,
chapter 6 “An Alternative Compensation System” available at:
http://cyber.law.harvard.edu/people/tfisher/PTKChapter6.pdf.
Agrain, P. “Sharing. Culture and Economy in the Internet Age”,
Amsterdam University Press, 2012 also at:
http://www.oapen.org/search?identifier=409602;keyword=Aigrain

There is a need to undertake a thorough analysis of the
economics underlying the creation and dissemination of culture
prior to introduction of any such compensation schemes.
Currently it is often wrongly assumed that every use of work
should be remunerated in order to satisfy creators’ interests.
It is also unclear in what extend any harm suffered by authors
whose works are non-commercially used on-line is not already
being compensated within the current levies scheme.

VI.Respect for rights

We believe that respect for rights is not created by
enforcement, but by establishing rules thatare perceived as
fair and balanced by as many people as possible. The reasoning
that the more restrictive the rules the more respect they
invoke is flawed.This is clearly proven in Centrum Cyfrowe’s
research “Copyright in Transition” that states: “The comparison
of perceptions of what is legal and illegal with the status quo
reveals that most respondents believethe law to be more
restrictive than it actually is.Our respondents have more
frequently assessed actions in given scenarios as prohibited –
while they are in fact legal – than the other way round.
Copyright is not breached due to insufficient knowledge of
what’s allowed. Copyright is breached in spite of the
conviction that many everyday practices are illegal (and an
exaggerated conviction, at that).”32

Danielewicz, M., Tarkowski, A., „Copyright in Transition..”. p.
5

The focus should be on adapting the rules to the digital era and
not on strengthening enforcement, which is already misused. So
called “copyright trolling” has spread out also in Poland
taking a modified form. In recent days we observe a flurry of
legal notices coming from a law firm to schools and libraries
alleging an infringing use ofa photo/portrait of the Nobel
Prize in Literature winner: Czesław Miłosz in schools’
presentations and on libraries’ educational Websites. The
notices contain threats of filing court actions if the targeted
institutions fail to pay excessive license fees (multiplied
three times for an intentional infringement) and damages for
infringement of moral right of an author of the portraits. It
is hard not to wonder whether the photographer could
intentionally be targeting public institutions as they are
usually dominated by bureaucratic procedures, risk-avert and
ready to pay what they asked for in order to avoid court
action. In consequence, their unintentional infringement of
copyright, committed in the public interest, provides
additional source of income for a little known photographer.

Needless to say that such practices should not be legitimized by
copyright rules.

Centrum Cyfrowe has submitted its response in the second phase
of IPRED consultations33

http://centrumcyfrowe.pl/wp-content/uploads/2013/03/CC_KonsultacjewsIPRED_v2.pdf
[in Polish]

. In our general remarks we noted that from the view point of
consumers there is no need to strengthen the enforcement of
IPRs. On contrary there is a need to minimize the sanctions
with respect to certain digital usesof content.

We postulate: (a) abolition of criminal and civil sanctions for
content sharing and transformative uses made by individuals on
non-commercial scale, (b) providing for mechanism enabling
exercise of rights granted by exceptions and limitationsto
copyright, especially rules allowing for circumventions of TMPs
and ban on contractual clause limiting permitted uses, (c)
banning anyfiltering of content by Internet service providers.

The above does not mean that we oppose all sanctions. Centrum
Cyfrowe has already expressed its opinion that only intentional
infringements committed on commercial scale should be penalized.

VII.  A single EU Copyright Title

Fully harmonized and transparent rules will benefit citizens and
businesses of the EU. However, given the attachment of member
states to their national copyright traditions, a full
harmonization may prove very difficult and time-consuming. The
recent case of a regulation on the measures relating to
personal data protection may serve as a disgraceful example of
an attempt at full harmonization, in an area with hardly no
legal tradition as compared with authors’ rights.

VIII.Other issues

In a longer timeframe European Union should take steps on the
global level in order to instigate international discussion
leading to a revision of the current system based on property
rights. In the digital era there are plenty of alternatives to
the current model of exclusive intellectual property rights
(IPRs). Economic incentives for creativity and innovation may
come from public and private grants, crowd-funding but as
important are social incentives such as the ability to share,
collaborate, and social recognition of your work.34

For more see: Gliscinski, K. „Intellectual Discord Rights. On
the globalisation of rights relating to intangible goods” [in
Polish] available at
http://conasuwiera.pl/wp-content/uploads/2012/09/Gliscinski-Prawa-niezgody-intelektualnej.pdf

Confusing intellectual property rights with the property rights
is common in our societiesand leads to conclusions that block
creativity. With respect to the protection of works of
authorship, people believe that “[intellectual]property is
property”. Consequently, they believe that copyrights should be
held in perpetuity by author’s heirs. They also believe
copyright should be absolute as to exclude any uses without
author’s express permission, even uses for the purpose of
parody or pastiche35

Danielewicz,M, Tarkowski, A “Copyright Law in Transition. On
Social Norms related to Content Usage” Centrum Cyfrowe Projekt:
Polska, 2013, p. 5, English version at
http://ngoteka.pl/bitstream/handle/item/203/Copyright%20Law%20in%20Transition_report%20summary.pdf?sequence=1

. Moreover over 60% of respondents do not understand that
copyright protects an intangible work. They associate the
protection with a material embodiment of suchwork and not a
work itself.

In the digital era the ownership of the content becomes
meaningless. People do not focus on ownership of music or
videos, they want to listen tothem, watch them, communicate and
share with others. In the era of streaming, VoD, catch-up TV it
is time to look at the alternatives to the IPRs and start
thinking of a way to free creativity from the property
restraints.

