


Public Consultation

on the review of the EU copyright rules

Contents

I.  Introduction  2

A.  Context ofthe consultation  2

B.  How to submit replies to this questionnaire  3

C.  Confidentiality  3

II.  Rights and the functioning of the Single Market  7

A.  Why is it not possible to access many online content
services from anywhere in Europe?  7

B.  Is there a need for more clarity as regards the scope of
what needs to be authorised (or not) in digital transmissions?
10

1.  The act of “making available”  10

2.  Two rights involved in a single act of exploitation  11

3.  Linking and browsing  12

4.  Download to own digital content  13

C.  Registration of works and other subject matter – is it a
good idea?  14

D.  How to improve the use and interoperability ofidentifiers
15

E.  Term of protection – is it appropriate?  15

III.  Limitations and exceptions in the Single Market  16

A.  Access to content in libraries andarchives  19

1.  Preservation and archiving  19

2.  Off-premises access to library collections  20

3.  E – lending  21

4.  Massdigitisation  22

B.  Teaching  23

C.  Research  25

D.  Disabilities  25

E.  Text and data mining  27

F.  User-generated content  28

IV.  Private copying and reprography  31

V.  Fair remuneration of authors and performers  33

VI.  Respect for rights  34

VII.  A single EU Copyright Title  36

VIII.  Other issues  36

Introduction

Context of the consultation

Over the last two decades, digital technology and the Internet
have reshaped the ways in which content iscreated, distributed,
and accessed. New opportunities have materialised for those that
create and produce content (e.g. a film, a novel, a song), for
new and existing distribution platforms, for institutions such
as libraries, for activities such as research and for citizens
who now expect to be able to access content – for information,
education or entertainment purposes – regardless of
geographical borders.

This new environment also presents challenges. One of them is
for the market to continue to adaptto new forms of distribution
and use. Another one is for the legislator to ensure that the
system of rights, limitations to rights and enforcement remains
appropriate and is adapted to the new environment. This
consultation focuses on the second of these challenges:
ensuring that the EU copyright regulatory framework stays fit
for purpose in the digital environment to support creation and
innovation, tap the full potential of the Single Market, foster
growth and investment in our economy and promote cultural
diversity.

In its "Communication on Content in the Digital Single Market"1

COM (2012)789 final, 18/12/2012.

the Commission set out two parallel tracks of action:on the one
hand, to complete its on-going effort to review and to
modernise the EU copyright legislative framework2

As announced in the Intellectual Property Strategy ' A single
market for Intellectual Property Rights: COM (2011)287 final,
24/05/2011.

3

"Based on market studies and impact assessment and legal
drafting work"as announced in the Communication (2012)789.

with a view to a decision in 2014 on whether to table
legislative reform proposals, andon the other, to facilitate
practical industry-led solutions through the stakeholder
dialogue "Licences for Europe" on issues on which rapidprogress
was deemed necessary and possible.

The "Licences for Europe" process has been finalised now4

See the document “Licences for Europe – tem pledges to bring
more content
online”:http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/copyright/docs/licences-for-europe/131113_ten-pledges_en.pdf.

. The Commission welcomes the practical solutions stakeholders
have put forward in this context and will monitor their
progress. Pledges have been made by stakeholders in all four
Working Groups (cross border portability of services,
user-generated content, audiovisual and film heritage and text
and data mining). Taken together, the Commission expects these
pledges to be a further step in making the user environment
easier in many different situations. The Commission also takes
note of the fact that two groups – user-generated content and
text and datamining – did not reach consensus among
participating stakeholders on either the problems to be
addressed or on the results. The discussions and results of
"Licences for Europe" will be also taken into account in the
context of the review of the legislative framework.

As part of the review process, the Commission is now launching a
public consultation on issues identified in the Communication on
Content in the Digital Single Market, i.e.:"territoriality in
the Internal Market, harmonisation, limitations and exceptions
to copyright in the digital age; fragmentation of the EU
copyright market; and how to improve the effectiveness and
efficiency of enforcement while underpinning its legitimacy in
the wider context of copyright reform". As highlighted in the
October 2013 European CouncilConclusions5

EUCO 169/13, 24/25 October 2013.

"Providing digital services and content across the single market
requires the establishment of a copyright regime for the digital
age. The Commission will therefore complete its on-going review
of the EU copyright framework in spring 2014. It is important
to modernise Europe's copyright regime and facilitate
licensing, while ensuring a high level protection of
intellectual property rights and taking into account cultural
diversity".

This consultation builds on previous consultations and public
hearings, in particular those on the "Green Paper on copyright
in the knowledge economy"6

COM(2008)
466/3,http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/copyright/copyright-infso/index_en.htm#maincontentSec2.

, the "Green Paper on the online distribution of audiovisual
works"7

COM(2011) 427
final,http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/consultations/2011/audiovisual_en.htm.

and "Content Online"8

http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/consultations/2009/content_online_en.htm.

. These consultations provided valuable feedback from
stakeholders on a number of questions, on issues as diverse as
the territoriality of copyright and possible ways to overcome
territoriality, exceptions related to the online dissemination
of knowledge, and rightholders’ remuneration, particularly in
the audiovisual sector. Views were expressed by stakeholders
representing all stages in the value chain, including right
holders, distributors, consumers, and academics. The questions
elicited widely diverging views on the best way to proceed. The
"Green Paper on Copyright in the Knowledge Economy" was followed
up by a Communication. The replies to the "Green Paper on the
online distribution of audiovisual works" have fed into
subsequent discussions on the Collective Rights Management
Directive and into the current review process.

How to submit replies to this questionnaire

You are kindly asked to send your repliesby 5 February 2014as a
word or pdf document to the following e-mail address of DG
Internal Market and
Services:markt-copyright-consultation@ec.europa.eu. Please note
that replies sent after that date will not be taken into
account.

This consultation is addressed to different categories of
stakeholders. To the extent possible, the questions indicate
the category/ies of respondents most likely to be concerned by
them (annotation in brackets, before the actual question).
Respondents should nevertheless feel free to reply to any/all
of the questions. Also, please note that, apart from the
question concerning the identification of the respondent, none
of the questions is obligatory. Replies containing answers only
to part of the questions will be also accepted.

You are requested to provide your answers directly within this
consultation document. For the “Yes/No/No opinion” questions
please put the selected answer inboldandunderlineit so it is
easy for us to see your selection.

In your answers to the questions, you are invited to refer to
the situation in EU Member States.You are also invited in
particular to indicate, where relevant, what would be the
impact of options you put forward in terms of costs,
opportunitiesand revenues.

The public consultation is available in English. Responses may,
however, be sent in any of the 24 official languages of the EU.

Confidentiality

The contributions received in this round of consultation as well
as a summary report presenting the responses in a statistical
and aggregated form will be published on the website of DG
MARKT.

Please note that all contributions received will be published
together with the identity of the contributor, unless the
contributor objects to the publication of their personal data
on the grounds that such publication would harm his or her
legitimate interests. In this case, the contribution will be
published in anonymous form upon the contributor's explicit
request. Otherwise the contribution will not be published nor
will its content be reflected in the summary report.

Pleaseread ourPrivacy statement.

Please identify yourself:

Name:

SeanNowak

In the interests of transparency, organisations (including, for
example, NGOs, trade associations and commercial enterprises)
are invited to provide the public with relevant information
about themselves by registering in the Interest
RepresentativeRegister and subscribing to its Code of Conduct.

If you are a Registered organisation, please indicate your
Register ID number below. Your contribution will then be
considered as representing the views of your organisation.

…………………………………………………………………………………………………..

…………………………………………………………………………………………………..

If your organisation is not registered, you have the opportunity
toregister now. Responses from organisations not registered
willbe published separately.

If you would like to submit your reply on an anonymous basis
please indicate it belowby underlining the following answer:

Yes, I would like to submit my reply on an anonymous basis

Type of respondent(Pleaseunderlinethe appropriate):

End user/consumer(e.g. internet user, reader, subscriber to
music or audiovisual service, researcher, student) OR
Representative of end users/consumers

for the purposes of this questionnaire normally referred to
in questions as"end users/consumers"

Institutional user(e.g. school, university, research centre,
library, archive) OR Representative of institutional users

for the purposes of this questionnaire normally referred to
in questions as"institutional users"

Author/Performer ORRepresentative of authors/performers

Publisher/Producer/Broadcaster OR Representative of
publishers/producers/broadcasters

the two above categoriesare,for the purposes of this
questionnaire, normally referred to in questions as"right
holders"

Intermediary/Distributor/Other service provider(e.g. online
music or audiovisual service, games platform, social media,
search engine, ICT industry)OR Representative of
intermediaries/distributors/other service providers

for the purposes of this questionnaire normally referred to
in questions as"service providers"

Collective Management Organisation

Public authority

Member State

Other(Please explain):

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Rights and the functioningof the Single Market

Why is it not possible to access many online content services
from anywhere in Europe?[The territorial scope of the rights
involved in digital transmissions and the segmentation of the
market through licensing agreements]

Holders of copyright and related rights – e.g. writers, singers,
musicians - do not enjoy a single protection in the EU. Instead,
they are protected on the basis of a bundle of national rights
in each Member State. Those rights have been largely harmonised
by the existing EU Directives. However, differences remain and
the geographical scope of the rights is limited to the
territory of the Member State granting them. Copyright is thus
territorial in the sense that rights are acquired and enforced
on a country-by-country basis under national law9

This principle has been confirmed by the Court of justice on
several occasions.

.

The dissemination of copyright-protected content on the Internet
– e.g. by a music streaming service, or by an online e-book
seller – therefore requires, in principle, an authorisation for
each national territory in which the content is communicated to
the public. Rightholders are, of course, in a position to grant
a multi-territorial or pan-European licence, such that content
services can be provided in several Member States and across
borders. A number of steps have been taken at EU level to
facilitate multi-territorial licences: the proposal for a
Directive on Collective Rights Management10

Proposal for a Directive of the European Parliamentand of the
Council of 11 July 2012 on collective management of copyright
and related rights and multi-territorial licensing of rights in
musical works for online uses in the internal market, COM(2012)
372 final.

should significantly facilitate the deliveryof multi-territorial
licences in musical works for online services11

Collective Management Organisations play a significant role in
the management of online rights for musical works in contrast
to the situation where online rights are licensed directlyby
right holders such as film or record producers or by newspaper
or book publishers.

; the structured stakeholder dialogue “Licences for Europe”12

You can find more information on the following website:
http://ec.europa.eu/licences-for-europe-dialogue/.

and market-led developments such as the on-going work in the
Linked Content Coalition13

You can find more information on the following
website:http://www.linkedcontentcoalition.org/.

.

"Licences for Europe" addressed in particular the specific issue
of cross-border portability, i.e. the ability of consumers
having subscribed to online services in their Member State to
keep accessing them when travelling temporarily to other Member
States. As a result, representatives of the audio-visual sector
issued a joint statement affirming their commitment to continue
working towards the further development of cross-border
portability14

See the document “Licences for Europe – tem pledges to bring
more content
online”:http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/copyright/docs/licences-for-europe/131113_ten-pledges_en.pdf.

.

Despite progress, there are continued problems with the
cross-border provision of, and access to, services. These
problems are most obvious to consumers wanting to access
services that are made available in Member States other than
the one in which they live. Not all online services are
available in all Member States and consumers face problems when
trying to access such services across borders. In some
instances, even if the “same” service is available in all
Member States, consumers cannot access the service across
borders (they can only access their “national” service, and if
they try to access the "same" service in another Member State
they are redirected to the one designatedfor their country of
residence).

This situation may in part stem from the territoriality of
rights and difficulties associated with the clearing of rights
in different territories. Contractual clauses in licensing
agreements between right holders and distributors and/or
between distributors and end users may also be at the origin of
some of the problems (denial of access, redirection).

The main issue at stake here is, therefore, whether further
measures (legislative or non-legislative, including
market-ledsolutions) need to be taken at EU level in the medium
term15

For possible long term measures such as the establishment of a
European Copyright Code (establishing a single title) see
section VII of this consultation document.

to increase the cross-borderavailability of content services in
the Single Market, while ensuring an adequate level of
protection for right holders.

[In particular if you are an end user/consumer:]Have you faced
problems when trying to access online services in an EU Member
State other than the one in which you live?

 YES - Please provide examples indicating the Member State,
the sector and the type of content concerned (e.g. premium
content such as certain films and TV series, audio-visual
content in general, music, e-books,magazines, journals and
newspapers, games, applications and other software)

Ständig stößt man auf Fehlermeldungen wie diese: "Der Inhalt,
auf den Sie zugreifen wollen, darf in Ihrem Land nicht
zugänglich gemacht werden." Allerdings ist es völlig
undurchsichtig, wie diese Beschränkungen zustande kommen. Auf
welcher Rechtsgrundlage eine Sperre basiert und wie sie
technisch realisiert wird, wird nicht transparent gemacht.
Offensichtlich werden dazu meine Daten (IP-Adresse,
Browser-Einstellungen...) ausgewertet, und zwar ohne dass ich
wüsste, dass ich dazu jemals meine Einwilligung gegeben habe.
Außerdem wird derselbe Inhalt je nachdem, auf welche Weise ich
ihn ansteuere, manchmal angezeigt, manchmal aber auch nicht.
Das ist sehr verunsichernd: Ein Video, das "möglicherweise
Musik von UMG enthält," wird auf der einen Plattform
abgespielt, auf der nächsten nicht. Was hat das zu bedeuten?
Soll ich nun selber anfangen zu recherchieren, bei welchem
Konzern welche Künstler unter Vertrag sind und was das im
jeweiligenFall für meine rechtliche Situation bedeutet, bevor
ich irgendeinen Link anklicke oder ihn gar verbreite? Manchmal
werde ich von anderen Internet-Nutzern gefragt, ob Sie damit
rechnen müssen, eine Rechnung zu erhalten oder eine Strafe
zahlen zu müssen, weil sie diesen oder jenen Video-Link auf
dieser oder jener Plattform angeklickt haben. Die
Verunsicherung kann soweit gehen, dass diese Leute sich das
Surfen komplett abgewöhnen. In einer Zeit, in der die
technischen Voraussetzungen dafür gegeben sind, dassMenschen
sich umfassend informieren, und die zugleich eine Zeit ist, in
der es von größter Bedeutung wäre, dass möglichst viele
Menschen, entsprechende Ressourcen möglichst weitreichend
nutzen, um sich zu informieren, ist das eine sehr traurige
Entwicklung. Dass vorhandene und leicht verbreitbare
Wissensressourcen ungenutzt bleiben, ist m. E. in erster Linie
eine Katastrophe auf der Ebene der persönlichen Entwicklung;
die "Marktsituation" ist für meine Meinung nicht so zentral. Da
diese Studie in einem EU-Kontext steht, spielt ein Thema wie
"persönliche Entwicklung" hier vermutlich überhaupt keine
Rolle, weder auf Seiten der Kommission noch auf Seiten der
Organisatoren dieses Fragebogens. Ich gehöre aber zu denjenigen
rückständigen EU-Bürgern, die eine solche Kategorie noch nicht
völlig aufgegeben haben und nicht alles der Marktlogik
unterordnen. Dennoch würde ich anmerken, dass es Teile des
Markts geben dürfte, für die die Verunsicherung normaler
Verbraucher, wie ich einer bin, vermutlich nicht unbedingt
günstig ist. Allerdings ist meine Einschätzung so, dass das
von der Größe der Unternhemen abhängt. Konzerne haben wohl die
erforderlichenmateriellen Ressourcen, um selber die
juristischen Kompetenzen für den Umgang mit den bestehenden
Rechtskonstruktionen einzukaufen. Und sie können demzufolge
auch so agieren, dass sie von der Verunsicherung normaler
Verbraucher eher Vorteile als Nachteile haben. Und sie haben
erfahrungsgemäß auch die materiellen Ressourcen, um dafür zu
sorgen, dass die Verunsicherung bestehen bleibt. Denn wenn
verunsicherte Bürger lieber eine Datei im Internet kaufen, als
auf den Link zu einer frei verfügbaren Quelle zu klicken, weil
sie befürchten, sonst wie ein Dieb (oder wie ein noch
schlimmerer Verbrecher) behandelt zu werden, dann nutztdas
natürlich den Geschäften.

 NO

 NO OPINION

[In particular if you are a service provider:]Have you faced
problems when seeking to provide online services across borders
in the EU?

 YES - Please explain whether such problems, in your
experience, arerelated to copyright or to other issues (e.g.
business decisions relating to the cost of providing services
across borders, compliance with other laws such as consumer
protection)? Please provide examples indicating the Member
State, the sector and the type of content concerned (e.g.
premium content such as certain films and TV series,
audio-visual content in general, music, e-books, magazines,
journals and newspapers, games, applications and other
software).

Auch bei dieser Frage, geht es anscheinend nurum Geschäfte, wie
es traurigerweise in einem System wie der EU nicht anders zu
erwarten ist. Auf die Idee, dass auch Privatpersonen oder
private Gruppen mit Inhalten zu tun haben, zu denen eine wie
auch immer geartete Öffentlichkeit, im Sinn einer optimalen
Informationsteilhabe möglichst umfassenden Zugang bekommen
sollte, und auf die Idee, dass auch dabei Probleme entstehen,
kommt anscheinend niemand. Ich denke dabei zum Beispiel an
Dokumente unterschiedlichster Art (alte Drucke (Text / Bild),
Foto-, Filmaufnahmen, Kunstwerke...), die in privater
Initiative digitalisiert werden, und auch an originär digital
Inhalte (Remix...), die nicht an die Öffentlichkeit kommen,
weil die Inhaber nicht einschätzen können, ob andere, ihnen
überlegene, Akteure Rechte an diesem Material für sich
beanspruchen, und die sich eine juristische Expertise nicht
leisten können. Mein Eindruck ist, dass diese Probleme in
erster Linie mit Strategien diverser rechteverwertender
Unternehmen zu tun haben, die solche Instrumente wie das
Urheberrecht, die zum Teil (!) sinnvoll und löblich sind,
ausnutzen und dabei die "Kreativen" als Geiseln nehmen, um
unter dem Deckmantel des sogenannten Schutzes geistigen
Eigentums ihre Einnahmen abzusichern, wovon übrigens die
Kreativen, denen ja angeblich die ganze Sorge und Fürsorge
dieser Verwerter gilt und die dafür ihre Rechte immer weiter
diesen Verwertern übertragen sollen, anscheinend nicht
unbedingt profitieren.

 NO

 NO OPINION

[In particular if you are a right holder or a
collectivemanagement organisation:]How often are you asked to
grant multi-territorial licences? Please indicate, if possible,
thenumber of requests per year and provide examples indicating
the Member State, the sector and the type of content concerned.


[Open question]

Trifft auf mich nicht zu. Aber auch für mich als
Nicht-Betroffenen ist es unbegreiflich, dass nicht dafür
gesorgt wird, dass es die entsprechenden Lizenzen gibt, so dass
zumindest innerhalb der EU Einheitlichkeit und Verlässlichkeit
bestünde. Die Unsicherheit, die hier herrscht, hält garantiert
viele Inhaber und Schöpfer von Inhalten davon ab, sie im
Internet anzubieten (sei es auf kommerzieller, sei es auf
nicht-kommerzieller Basis).

If you have identified problems in the answers to any of the
questions above – what would be the best way to tackle them?

[Open question]

Zumindest sollte dafür gesorgt werden, dass innerhalb der EU
jede Person an jedem Ort im Hinblick auf digitale Inhalte und
Medien gleich behandelt wird – und zwar in einer Art und Weise,
die transparent und verständlich ist – und zwar auch für
juristische Laien und Normalvermögende, die keine
Rechtsabteilung beschäftigen können.

[In particular if you are a right holder or a collective
management organisation:]Are there reasonswhy, even in cases
where you hold all the necessary rights for all the territories
in question, you would still find it necessary or justified to
impose territorial restrictions on a service provider (in
order, for instance, to ensure that access to certain content
is not possible in certain European countries)?

 YES – Please explain by giving examples

Solche Gründe gibt es sicherlich, aber sie stehen im Gegensatz
zum übergeordneten Ideal einer gleichberechtigten
Informationsteilhabe der Bürgerinnen und Bürger Europas.

 NO

 NO OPINION

[In particular if you are e.g. a broadcaster or a service
provider:]Are there reasons why, even in cases where you have
acquired all the necessary rights for all the territories in
question, you would still find itnecessary or justified to
impose territorial restrictions on the service recipient (in
order for instance, to redirect the consumer to a different
website than the one he is trying to access)?

 YES – Please explain by giving examples

Solche Gründe gibt essicherlich, aber sie stehen im Gegensatz
zum übergeordneten Ideal einer gleichberechtigten
Informationsteilhabe der Bürgerinnen und Bürger Europas.

 NO

 NO OPINION

Do you think that further measures (legislative or
non-legislative, including market-led solutions) are needed at
EU level to increase the cross-border availability of content
services in the Single Market, while ensuring an adequate level
of protection for right holders?

YES – Please explain

Ich unterstütze insbesondere die Wikimedia-Forderung nach einem
use-it-or-lose-it-Prinzip beim Urheberrecht und erhoffe mir
davon, dass Inhalte, die bis jetzt versteckt bleiben in Zukunft
überall in der EU zugänglich gemacht werden und zwar auch in
den kleinen Wirtschaftsräumen.

 NO – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO OPINION

Is there a need for more clarity as regards the scope of what
needs to be authorised (or not) in digital transmissions?[The
definition of the rights involved in digital transmissions]

The EU framework for the protection of copyright and related
rights in the digital environment is largely established by
Directive 2001/29/EC16

Directive 2001/29/EC of the European Parliament and of the
Council of 22 May 2001 on the harmonisation of certain aspects
of copyright and related rights in the information society.

on the harmonisation of certain aspects of copyright and related
rights in the information society. OtherEU directives in this
field that are relevant in the onlineenvironment are those
relating to the protection of software17

Directive 2009/24/EC of the European Parliament and of the
Council of 23 April 2009 on the legal protection of computer
programs.

and databases18

Directive 96/9/EC of the European Parliamentand of the Council
of 11 March 1996 on the legal protection of databases.

.

Directive 2001/29/ECharmonises the rights of authors and
neighbouring rightholders19

Film and record producers, performers and broadcasters are
holders of so-called “neighbouringrights” in, respectively,
their films, records, performances and broadcast. Authors’
content protected by copyright is referred to as a “work” or
“works”, while content protected by neighbouring rights is
referred to as “other subject matter”.

which are essential for the transmission of digital copies of
works (e.g. an e-book) and other protected subject matter (e.g.
a record in a MP3 format) over the internet or similar digital
networks.

The most relevant rights for digital transmissions are the
reproduction right, i.e. the right to authorise or prohibit the
making of copies20

The right to “authorise or prohibit direct or indirect,
temporary or permanent reproduction by any means and in any
form, in whole or in part” (see Art. 2 of Directive
2001/29/EC)although temporary acts of reproduction of a
transient or incidental nature are, under certain conditions,
excluded (see art. 5(1) of Directive 2001/29/EC).

, (notably relevant at the start of the transmission – e.g. the
uploading of a digital copy of a work to a server in view of
making it available – andat the users’ end – e.g. when a user
downloads a digital copy of a work) and the communication to
the public/making available right, i.e. the rights to authorise
or prohibit the dissemination of the worksin digital networks21

The right to authorise or prohibit any communication to the
public by wire or wireless means and to authorise or prohibit
the making available to the public “on demand” (see Art. 3 of
Directive 2001/29/EC).

. These rights are intrinsically linked in digital transmissions
and both need to be cleared.

The act of “making available”

Directive 2001/29/EC specifies neitherwhatis covered by the
making available right (e.g. the upload, the accessibility by
the public, the actual receptionby the public) norwherethe act
of “making available” takes place. This does not raise
questions if the act is limited to a single territory.
Questions arise however when the transmission covers several
territories and rights need to be cleared (does theact of
"making available" happen in the country of the upload only? in
each of the countries where the content is potentially
accessible? in each of the countries where the content is
effectively accessed?). The most recent case law of the Court
of Justiceof the European Union (CJEU) suggests that a relevant
criterion is the “targeting” of a certain Member State's
public22

See in particular Case C-173/11 (Football Dataco vs Sportradar)
and Case C-5/11 (Donner) for copyright and related rights, and
Case C-324/09 (L’Oréal vs eBay) for trademarks. With regard to
jurisdiction see also joined Cases C-585/08 and C-144/09
(Pammer and Hotel Alpenhof) and pending CaseC-441/13 (Pez
Hejduk); see however, adopting a different approach, Case
C-170/12 (Pinckney vs KDG Mediatech).

. According to this approach the copyright-relevant act (which
has to be licensed) occurs at least in those countries which
are “targeted” by the online service provider. A service
provider “targets” a group of customers residing in a specific
country when it directs its activity to that group, e.g. via
advertisement, promotions, a language or a currency
specifically targeted at that group.

Is the scope of the “making available” right in cross-border
situations – i.e. when content is disseminatedacross borders –
sufficiently clear?

 YES

 NO – Please explain how this could be clarified and what
type of clarification would be required (e.g. as in "targeting"
approach explained above, as in "country of origin" approach23

The objective of implementing a “country of origin” approach is
to localise the copyright relevant act that must be licenced in
a single Member State (the "country of origin", which could be
for example the Member State in which the content is uploaded
or where the service provider is established), regardless of in
how many Member States the work can be accessed or received.
Such an approach has already been introduced at EU level with
regard to broadcasting by satellite (see Directive 93/83/EEC on
the coordination of certain rules concerning copyright and
rights related to copyright applicable to satellite
broadcasting and cable retransmission).

)

Absolut nicht. Schon innerhalb irgendwelcher Grenzen ist die
Verwirrung und Unsicherheit perfekt. Darf man verlinken? Darf
man zitieren? Wenn ja, in welchem Umfang? Wovon hängt das ab?
Darf man anzeigen? In welcher Auflösung? Darf man Tonaufnahmen,
bewegte Bildaufnahmen anbieten? Handelt es sich dann um eine
Aufführung, eine Verbreitung, eine Vervielfältigung...?Ein
heilloser Zustand.

NO OPINION

[In particular if you are a right holder:]Could a clarification
of the territorial scope of the “making available” right have
an effect on the recognition of your rights (e.g.whether you
are considered to be an author or not, whether youare
considered to have transferred your rights or not), on your
remuneration, or on the enforcement of rights (including the
availability of injunctive relief24

Injunctive relief is a temporary or permanent remedy allowing
the right holder to stop or prevent an infringement of his/her
right.

)?

 YES – Please explain how such potential effects could be
addressed

Selbstverständlich müssten in diesem Zusammenhang die Querbezüge
zur Regelung von Urheberschaft und Verwertung geklärt werden.

 NO

 NO OPINION

Two rights involved in a single act of exploitation

Each act of transmission in digital networks entails (in the
current state of technology and law) several reproductions.
This means that there are two rights that apply to digital
transmissions: the reproduction right and the making available
right. This may complicate the licensing of works for online
use notably when the two rights are held by different
persons/entities.

[In particular if you a service provider or a right holder:]Does
the application of two rights to a single act of economic
exploitation in the online environment (e.g. a download) create
problems for you?

 YES – Please explain what type of measures would be needed
in order to address such problems (e.g. facilitation of joint
licenceswhen the rights are in different hands, legislation to
achieve the "bundling of rights")

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO

 NO OPINION

Linking and browsing

Hyperlinks are references to data that lead a userfrom one
location in the Internet to another. They are indispensable for
the functioning of the Internet as a network. Several cases are
pending before the CJEU25

Cases C-466/12 (Svensson), C-348/13 (Bestwater International)
and C-279/13 (C More entertainment).

in which the question has been raised whether the provision of
a clickable link constitutes an act of communication to the
public/making available to the public subject to the
authorisation of the rightholder.

A user browsing the internet (e.g.viewing a web-page) regularly
creates temporary copies of works and other subject-matter
protected under copyright on the screen and in the 'cache'
memory of his computer. A question has been referred to the
CJEU26

Case C-360/13 (Public Relations Consultants Association Ltd).
See
alsohttp://www.supremecourt.gov.uk/decided-cases/docs/UKSC_2011_0202_PressSummary.pdf.

as to whether such copies are alwayscovered by the mandatory
exception for temporary acts of reproduction provided for in
Article 5(1) of Directive 2001/29/EC.

Should the provision of a hyperlink leading to a work or other
subject matter protected under copyright, either in general or
under specific circumstances, be subject to the authorisation
of the rightholder?

 YES – Please explain whether you consider this to be the
case in general, or under specific circumstances, and why

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO – Please explain whether you consider this to be the case
in general, or under specific circumstances, and why (e.g.
because it does not amount to an act of communication to the
public – or to a new public, or because it should be covered by
a copyright exception)

Wer das fordert, kann nicht wirklich verstanden haben, worum es
sich bei einem Link handelt. Aber als Verwertungskonzern kann
man ja mal versuchen, die Öffentlichkeit zu verunsichern und
damit Geld zu verdienen.

 NO OPINION

Should the viewing of a web-page where this implies the
temporary reproduction of a work or other subject matter
protected under copyright on the screen and in the cache memory
of the user’s computer, either in general or under specific
circumstances, be subject to the authorisation of the
rightholder?

 YES – Please explain whether you consider this to be the
case in general, or under specific circumstances, and why

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO – Please explain whether you consider this to be the case
in general, or under specific circumstances, and why (e.g.
because it is or should be covered by a copyright exception)

Nein, "Urheberrechte" auf ein technisches Anzeigen von Inhalten
anzuwenden, die dadurch nicht weiter vervielfältigt werden, ist
absurd. Wenn das temporäre Speichern von Daten auf Datenträgern
verboten sein soll, kann auch gleich das Internet verboten
werden.Wer denkt sich denn solche Fragen aus?

 NO OPINION

Download to own digital content

Digital content is increasingly being bought via digital
transmission (e.g. download to own). Questions arise as to the
possibility for users to dispose of the files they buy in this
manner (e.g. by selling them or by giving them as a gift). The
principle of EU exhaustion of the distribution right applies in
the case of the distribution of physical copies (e.g. when a
tangiblearticle such as a CD or a book, etc. is sold, the right
holder cannot preventthe further distribution of that tangible
article)27

See also recital 28 of Directive 2001/29/EC.

. The issue that arises here is whether this principle can also
be applied in the case of an act of transmission equivalent in
its effect to distribution (i.e. where the buyer acquires the
property of the copy)28

In Case C-128/11 (Oracle vs. UsedSoft) the CJEU ruled that an
author cannot oppose the resale of a second-hand licence that
allows downloading his computer program from his website and
using it for anunlimited period of time. The exclusive right of
distribution of a copy of a computer program covered by such a
licence is exhausted on its first sale. While it is thus
admitted that the distribution right may be subject to
exhaustion in case of computerprograms offered for download
with the right holder’s consent, the Court was careful to
emphasise that it reached this decision based on the Computer
Programs Directive. It was stressed that this exhaustion rule
constituted alex specialisin relation tothe Information Society
Directive (UsedSoft, par. 51, 56).

. This raises difficult questions, notably relating to the
practical application of such an approach (how to avoid
re-sellers keeping and using a copy of a work after they have
“re-sold” it – thisis often referred to as the “forward and
delete” question) as well as to the economic implications of
the creation of a second-hand market of copies of perfect
quality that never deteriorate (in contrast to the second-hand
market for physical goods).

[Inparticular if you are an end user/consumer:]Have you faced
restrictions when trying to resell digital files that you have
purchased (e.g. mp3 file, e-book)?

 YES – Please explain by giving examples

Weil es diese Einschränkungen der Eigentumsrechte gibt,kaufe ich
grundsätzlich keine digitalen Inhalte und keine DRM-belasteten
Inhalte und Medien.

 NO

 NO OPINION

[In particular if you are a right holder or a service provider:]
What would be the consequences of providing a legal framework
enabling the resale of previously purchased digital content?
Please specify per market (type of content) concerned.

[Open question]

Sofern ein solcher rechtlicher Rahmen vernünftig gestaltet wäre,
würde er eine gewisse Korrektur der Entrechtung der Bürgerinnen
und Bürger,die im Interesse von Konzernen geschieht,
darstellen.

Registration of works and other subject matter – is it a good
idea?

Registration is not often discussed in copyright in the EU as
the existing international treaties in the area prohibit
formalities as a condition for the protection and exercise of
rights. However, this prohibition is not absolute29

For example, it does not affect “domestic” works – i.e. works
originating in the country imposing the formalities as opposed
to works originating inanother country.

. Moreover a system of registration does not need to be made
compulsory or constitute a precondition for the protection and
exercise of rights. With a longer term of protection and with
the increased opportunities that digital technology provides
for the use of content (including older works and works that
otherwise would nothave been disseminated), the advantages and
disadvantages of a system of registration are increasingly
being considered30

On the basis of Article 3.6 of the Directive2012/28/EU of the
European Parliament and of the Council of 25 October 2012 on
certain permitted uses of orphan works, a publicly accessible
online database is currently being set up by the Office for
Harmonisation of the Internal Market (OHIM) for the
registration of orphan works.

.

Would the creation of a registration system at EU level help in
the identification and licensing of works and other subject
matter?

 YES

 NO

 NO OPINION

What would be the possible advantages of such a system?

[Openquestion]

Es würde es dem gewöhnlichen Menschen überhaupt ermöglichen,
sich einen Einblick in die Rechtesituation zu verschaffen.
Solang ein solches System nicht existiert, kann es den
Bürgerinnen und Bürgern nicht billigerweise zugemutet werden,
dieentsprechenden gesetzlichen bestimmungen einzuhalten.

What would be the possible disadvantages of such a system?

[Open question]

Es wäre natürlich mit einem gewissen, aber im Verhältnis zum
Nutzen sinnvollen, Aufwand verbunden.

What incentives for registration by rightholders could be
envisaged?

[Open question]

Für einen vernünftigen Rechteinhaber wäre über den Nutzen der
Klärung der Rechtesituation hinaus kein weiterer Anreiz
erforderlich.

How to improve the use and interoperability of identifiers

There are many private databases of works and other subject
matter held by producers, collective management organisations,
and institutions such as libraries, which are based to
a greater or lesser extent on the use of (more or less)
interoperable, internationally agreed ‘identifiers’.
Identifiers can be compared to a reference number embedded in a
work, are specific to the sector in which they have been
developed31

E.g. the International Standard Recording Code (ISRC) is used to
identify recordings, the International Standard Book Number
(ISBN) is used to identify books.

, and identify, variously, the work itself, the owner or the
contributor to a work or other subject matter. There are
notable examples of where industry is undertaking actions to
improve the interoperability of suchidentifiers and databases.
The Global Repertoire Database32

You will find more information about this initiative on the
following website:http://www.globalrepertoiredatabase.com/.

should, once operational, provide a single source of information
on the ownership and control of musical works worldwide. The
Linked Content Coalition33

You will find more information about this initiative (funded in
part by the European Commission) on the following website:
www.linkedcontentcoalition.org.

was established to develop building blocks for the expression
and management of rights and licensing across all content and
media types. It includes the development of a Rights Reference
Model(RRM) – a comprehensive data model for all types of rights
in all types of content. The UK Copyright Hub34

You will find more information about this initiative on the
following website:http://www.copyrighthub.co.uk/.

is seeking to take such identification systems a step further,
and to create a linked platform, enabling automated licensing
across different sectors.

What should be the role of the EU in promoting the adoption
of identifiers in the content sector, and in promoting the
development and interoperability of rights ownership and
permissions databases?

[Open question]

Die Rolle sollte sein, dafür zu sorgen, dass es eine
einheitliche und verständliche Lösung gibt, die für alle
Bürgerinnen und Bürgerohne Hindernisse funktioniert, so dass
unter anderem und vor allem die relevanten Identifikatoren
jederzeit und für jede und jeden und zwar kostenlos zur
Verfügung steht.

Term of protection – is it appropriate?

Works and other subject matter are protected under copyright for
a limited period of time. After the term of protection has
expired, a work falls into the public domain and can be freely
used by anyone (in accordance with the applicable national
rules on moral rights). The Berne Convention35

BerneConvention for the Protection of Literary and Artistic
Works,http://www.wipo.int/treaties/en/ip/berne/.

requires a minimum term of protection of 50 years after the
death of the author. The EU rules extend this term of
protection to 70 years after the death of the author (as do
many other countries, e.g. the US).

With regard to performers in the music sector and phonogram
producers, the term provided for in the EU rules also extend 20
years beyond what is mandated in international agreements,
providing for a term of protection of 70 years after the first
publication. Performers and producers in the audio-visual
sector, however, do not benefit from such an extended term of
protection.

Are the current terms of copyright protection still appropriate
in the digital environment?

 YES – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO – Please explain if they should be longer or shorter

Absolut nichtmehr zeitgemäß. Wer die unglaublich langen
Schutzfristen heute noch verteidigt, muss ein Verwerter sein.

 NO OPINION

Limitations and exceptions in the Single Market

Limitations and exceptions to copyright and related rights
enable the use of works andother protected subject-matter,
without obtaining authorisation from the rightholders, for
certain purposes and to a certain extent (for instance the use
for illustration purposes of an extract from a novel by a
teacher in a literature class). At EU levelthey are established
in a number of copyright directives, most notably Directive
2001/29/EC36

Plus Directive 96/9/ECon the legal protection of
databases;Directive 2009/24/ECon the legal protection of
computer programs,and Directive 92/100/ECon rentalright and
lending right.

.

Exceptions and limitations in the national and EU copyright laws
have to respect international law37

Article 9(2) of the Berne Convention for the Protection of
Literary and Artistic Works (1971); Article 13 of the TRIPS
Agreement (Trade Related Intellectual Property Rights) 1994;
Article 16(2) of the WIPO Performers and Phonograms Treaty
(1996); Article 9(2) of the WIPO Copyright Treaty (1996).

. In accordance with international obligations, the EU acquis
requires that limitations and exceptions can only be applied in
certain special cases which do not conflict with a normal
exploitation of the work or other subject matter and do not
unreasonably prejudice the legitimate interest of the
rightholders.

Whereas the catalogue of limitations and exceptions included in
EU law is exhaustive (no other exceptions can be applied to the
rights harmonised at EU level)38

Other than the grandfathering of the exceptions of minor
importance for analogue uses existing in Member States at the
time of adoption of Directive 2001/29/EC (see, Art. 5(3)(o)).

, these limitations and exceptions are often optional39

With the exception of certain limitations: (i) in the Computer
Programs Directive, (ii) in the Database Directive, (iii)
Article 5(1) in theDirective 2001/29/EC and (iv) the Orphan
Works Directive.

, in the sense that Member States are free to reflect in
national legislation as many or as few of them as they wish.
Moreover, the formulation of certain of the limitations and
exceptions is generalenough to give significant flexibility to
the Member States as to how, and to what extent, to implement
them (if they decide to do so). Finally, it is worth noting
that not all of the limitations and exceptions included in the
EU legal framework for copyright are of equivalent significance
in policy terms and in terms of their potential effect on the
functioning of the Single Market.

In addition, in the same manner that the definition of the
rights is territorial (i.e. has an effect only within the
territory of the Member State), the definition of the
limitations and exceptions to the rights is territorial too (so
an act that is covered by an exception in a Member State "A" may
still require the authorisation of the rightholder once we move
to the Member State "B")40

Only the exception established in the recent Orphan Works
Directive (a mandatory exception to copyright and related
rights in the case where the rightholders are not known or
cannot be located) has been given a cross-border effect, which
meansthat, for instance, once a literary work – for instance a
novel – is considered an orphan work in a Member State, that
same novel shall be considered an orphan work in all Member
States and can be used and accessed in all Member States.

.

The cross-bordereffect of limitations and exceptions also raises
the question of fair compensation of rightholders. In some
instances, Member States are obliged to compensate rightholders
for the harm inflicted on them by a limitation or exception to
their rights. In other instances Member States are not obliged,
but may decide, to provide for such compensation.If a limitation
or exception triggering a mechanism of fair compensation were to
be given cross-border effect (e.g. the books are used for
illustration in an online course given by an university in
a Member State "A" and the students are in a Member State "B")
then there would also be a need to clarify which national law
should determine the level of that compensation and who should
pay it.

Finally, the question offlexibility and adaptability is being
raised: what is the best mechanism to ensure that the EU and
Member States’ regulatory frameworks adapt when necessary
(either to clarify that certain uses are covered by an
exception or to confirm that for certain uses the authorisation
of rightholders is required)? The main question here is whether
a greater degree of flexibility can be introduced in the EU and
Member States regulatory framework while ensuring the required
legal certainty, including for the functioning of the Single
Market, and respecting the EU's international obligations.

Are there problems arising from the fact that most limitations
and exceptions provided in the EU copyright directives are
optional for the Member States?

 YES – Please explainby referring to specific cases

Die Uneinheitlichkeit ist verwirrend und prohibitiv für private
wie kommerzielle Aktivitäten. Im übrigen sollte im Hinblick auf
informationelle Teilhabe nicht das Recht, Zugang zu verhindern,
der Normalfall sein und der Zugang die Ausnahme, sondern das
Recht auf Zugang sollte der Normalfall sein und die
Verhinderung die Ausnahme.

 NO – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO OPINION

Should some/all of the exceptions be made mandatory and, if so,
is there a need for a higher level of harmonisation of such
exceptions?

 YES – Please explain by referring to specific cases

Unter anderem müssen insbesondere Panoramefreiheit,
Zugänglichkeit verwaister Werke, von öffentlichen Stellen und
mit öffentlichen Geldern erstellter Inhalte und fair use
universell gelten.

 NO – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO OPINION

Should any new limitations and exceptions be addedto or removed
from the existing catalogue?Please explain by referring to
specific cases.

[Open question]

Das Zitatrecht muss angepasst und z. B. auf Audio und Video
ausgedehnt werden. Das ist sowohl für die künstlerische als
auch für eine angemessene wissenschaftliche Beschäftigung mit
entsprechenden Inhalten und Werken unerlässlich. Der Austausch
von Werken und Inhalten zwischen Privatpersonen sollte online
ebenso wie offline grundsätzlich erlaubt sein. In jeder Art von
Bildungs-, Aus, und Weiterbbildungskontext muss jede Art von
Inhalten frei von Hindernissen und Begrenzungen verwendbar
sein. Von öffentlichen Stellen oder ganz oder teilweise durch
öffentliche Gelder (mit)finanzierte Inhalte sind als
gesellschaftliches Eigentum anzusehen.

Independentlyfrom the questions above, is there a need to
provide for a greater degree of flexibility in the EU
regulatory framework for limitations and exceptions?

YES – Please explain why

Wenn Flexibilität mehr fair use bedeutet, ist sie wünschenswert.
Wenn aber Flexibilität Uneinheitlichkeit innerhalb Europas
bedeutet, ist das ein Problem.

 NO – Please explain why

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO OPINION

If yes, what would be the best approach to provide
forflexibility? (e.g. interpretation by national courts and the
ECJ, periodic revisions of the directives, interpretations by
the Commission, built-in flexibility, e.g. in the form of a
fair-use or fair dealing provision / open norm, etc.)? Please
explain indicating what would be the relative advantages and
disadvantages of such an approach as well as its possible
effects on the functioning of the Internal Market.

[Open question]

Es ist nicht klar, was hier mit Flexibilität gemeint ist. Daher
ist es nicht klar, ob sie erstrebenwert ist.

Does the territoriality of limitations and exceptions, in your
experience, constitute a problem?

 YES – Please explain why and specify which exceptions you
are referring to

Jede Art von Uneinheitlichkeit stiftet Unsicherheitund
Verwirrung.

 NO – Please explain why and specify which exceptions you are
referring to

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO OPINION

In the event that limitations and exceptions established at
nationallevel were to have cross-border effect, how should the
question of “fair compensation” be addressed, when such
compensation is part of the exception? (e.g. who pays whom,
where?)

[Open question]

Schon das Aufkommen dieser Frage zeigt, dass nationale
Sonderwege per se ein Problem darstellen, das daher unbedingt
vermieden werden sollte.

Access to content in libraries and archives

Directive 2001/29/EC enables Member States to reflect in their
national law a range of limitations and exceptions for the
benefit of publicly accessible libraries, educational
establishments and museums, as well as archives. If
implemented, these exceptions allow acts of preservation and
archiving41

Article 5(2)c of Directive 2001/29.

and enable on-site consultation of the works and other subject
matter in the collections of such institutions42

Article 5(3)n of Directive 2001/29.

. The public lending (under an exception or limitation) by these
establishments of physical copies of works and other subject
matter is governed by the Rental and Lending Directive43

Article 5 of Directive 2006/115/EC.

.

Questions arise as to whether the current framework continues to
achieve the objectives envisaged or whether it needs to be
clarified or updated to cover use in digital networks. At the
same time, questions arise as to the effect of such a possible
expansion on the normal exploitation of works and other subject
matter and as to the prejudice this may cause to rightholders.
The role of licensing and possible framework agreements between
different stakeholders also needs to be considered here.

Preservation and archiving

The preservation of the copies of works or other subject-matter
held in the collections of cultural establishments (e.g. books,
records, or films) – the restoration orreplacement of works, the
copying of fragile works - may involve the creation of another
copy/ies of these works or other subject matter. Most Member
States provide for an exception in their national laws allowing
for the making of such preservation copies. The scope of the
exception differs from Member State to Member State (as regards
the type of beneficiary establishments, the types of
works/subject-matter covered by the exception, the mode of
copying and the number of reproductions that a beneficiary
establishment may make). Also, the current legal status of new
types of preservation activities (e.g. harvesting and archiving
publicly available web content) is often uncertain.

(a)[In particular if you are an institutional user:]Have you
experienced specific problems when trying to use an exception
to preserve and archive specific works or other subject matter
in your collection?

(b)[In particular if you are a right holder:]Have you
experienced problems with the use by libraries, educational
establishments, museum or archives of the preservation
exception?

 YES – Please explain, by Member State, sector, and the type
of use in question.

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO

 NO OPINION

If there areproblems, how would they best be solved?

[Open question]

Die Bestimmungen müssen so angepasst werden, dass alle
sammelnden Einrichtungen das Recht haben, sämtliche
Sammlungsbestände ohne jegliche Begrenzung zu reproduzieren.

If your view is that alegislative solution is needed, what would
be its main elements? Which activities of the beneficiary
institutions should be covered and under which conditions?

[Open question]

Sämtliche sammelnden Institutionen sollen verpflichtet werden,
so schnell wie vernünftigerweise möglich sämtliche Bestände in
digitaler Form für die Allgemeinheit nutzbar zu machen.

If your view is that a different solution is needed, what would
it be?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Off-premises access to library collections

Directive 2001/29/EC provides an exception for the consultation
of works and other subject-matter (consulting an e-book,
watching a documentary) via dedicated terminals on thepremises
of such establishments for the purpose of research and private
study. The online consultation of works and other
subject-matter remotely (i.e. when the library user is not on
the premises of the library) requires authorisation and is
generally addressed in agreements between
universities/libraries and publishers. Some argue that the law
rather than agreements should provide for the possibility to,
and the conditions for, granting online access to collections.

(a)[In particular if you are an institutional user:]Have you
experienced specific problems when trying to negotiate
agreements with rights holders that enable you to provide
remote access, including across borders, to your collections
(or parts thereof) for purposes of research and privatestudy?

(b)[In particular if you are an end user/consumer:]Have you
experienced specific problems when trying to consult, including
across borders, works and other subject-matter held in the
collections of institutions such as universities and
nationallibraries when you are not on the premises of the
institutions in question?

(c)[In particular if you are aright holder:]Have you negotiated
agreements with institutional users that enable those
institutions to provide remote access, including across
borders, to the works or other subject-matter in their
collections, for purposes of research and private study?

[Open question]

Jeder interessierte Mensch, unter anderem Studierende und
wissenschaftlich Aktive vom Einsteiger bis zur
hochspezialisierten Forscherin, stößt ständig auf Nachweise von
digitalen Inhalten, die ihm von seinem aktuellen Standort aus
verschlossen bleiben, so dass man gezwungen ist, sich zum
Beispiel an bestimmte Leseplätze zu begeben, obwohl es sich um
absolut willkürliche technische Beschränkungen handelt. Ebenso
stoßen Interessierte auf allen Ebenen vom Laien bis zum
Wissenschaftlerin auf Hindernisse, weil die sachlich-fachlich
angezeigte Digitalisierung von Inhalten aus juristischen
Gründen unterbleibt. Sammelnde und bildende Einrichtungen
brauchen nicht nur die Erlaubnis, sondern die Aufgabe und
Verpflichtung zur Versorgung der Allgemeinheit mit allen
Inhalten, die sich mit vertretbarem technischen Aufwand
bereitstellen lassen. Dass die Einrichtungen stattdessen in
Verhandlungen mit Verwertern vom Gesetz in die Position von
Bittstellern gebracht werden und für die Auseinandersetzungen
Ressourcen verwenden müssen, anstatt mit den notwendigen
Mitteln ausgestattet zu werden, damit sie diese Aufgaben
erfüllen konnen,, ist eine Schande.

If there are problems, how would they best be solved?

[Open question]

Das Recht auf informationelle Teilhabe muss den richtigen
Stellenwert bekommen.

If your view is that a legislative solution is needed, what
would be its main elements? Which activitiesof the beneficiary
institutions should be covered and under which conditions?

[Open question]

Verpflichtung zur schnellstmöglichen Versorgung der
Allgemeinheit mit allen Inhalten, die sich mit vertretbarem
technischen Aufwand bereitstellen lassen.

Ifyour view is that a different solution is needed, what would
it be?

[Open question]

Die Lösung liegt in der Durchsetzung des Rechts auf
informationelle Teilhabe.

E – lending

Traditionally, public libraries have loaned physical copies of
works (i.e. books,sometimes also CDs and DVDs) to their users.
Recent technological developments have made it technically
possible for libraries to provide users with temporary access
to digital content,such as e-books, music or films via
networks. Under the current legalframework, libraries need to
obtain the authorisation of the rights holders to organise such
e-lending activities. In various Member States, publishers and
libraries are currently experimenting with different business
models for the making available of works online, including
direct supply of e-books to libraries by publishers or bundling
by aggregators.

(a)[In particular if you are alibrary:]Have you experienced
specific problems when trying to negotiate agreements to enable
the electronic lending (e-lending), including across borders, of
books or other materials held in your collection?

(b)[In particular if you are an end user/consumer:]Have you
experienced specific problems when trying to borrow books or
other materials electronically (e-lending),including across
borders, from institutions such as public libraries?

(c)[In particular if you are aright holder:]Have you negotiated
agreements with libraries to enable them to lend books or other
materials electronically, including across borders?

YES – Please explain with specific examples

Jeder interessierte Mensch, unter anderem Studierende und
wissenschaftlich Aktive vom Einsteiger bis zur
hochspezialisierten Forscherin, kennt das Problem, dass
elektronische Bestände in Bibliotheks- und
anderenSammlungskatalogen nachgewiesen werden, aber auf Grund
von Lizenzbestimmungen nicht zugänglich sind.

 NO

 NO OPINION

If there are problems, how would they best be solved?

[Open question]

Die zur Zeit üblichen DRM-Regelungen sind schikanenhaft
undbesonders im Hinblick auf Bibliotheken und andere sammelnde
und bildende Einrichtungen kontraproduktiv im Verhältnis zu
ihren gesetzlich festgelegten Aufgaben für das Gemeinwesen, und
unter anderem darum verdienen sie es nicht, legal zu sein. Sie
untergraben übrigens auch das Eigentumsrecht. Was eine
Bibliothek kauft, sollte ihr gehören und nicht weiterhin dem
Verkäufer.

The following two questions are relevant both to this point (n°
3) and the previous one (n° 2).

[In particular if you are aninstitutional user:]What differences
do you see in the management of physical and online collections,
including providing access to your subscribers? What problems
have you encountered?

[Open question]

Unvermeidbaren Schwierigkeiten bei der Bereitstellunganaloger
Bestände (Raum-Zeit...) stehen technisch völlig unnötige
Verhinderungen einer zeitgemäßen, sachgerechten und modernen
Nutzung digitaler Bestände gegenüber, die übrigens für eine
moderne Gesellschaft peinlich sind, weil sie der Notwendigkeit
unserer Zeit und der Logik der verfügbaren Technologie
hohnsprechen.

[In particular if you are a right holder:]What difference do you
see between libraries’ traditional activities such as
on-premises consultation or public lending and activities such
as off-premises (online, at a distance) consultation and
e-lending? What problems have you encountered?

[Open question]

Eigentlich ist die Digitalisierung die technische Lösung für die
Probleme der traditionellen Bereitstellung von Inhalten
(Begrenzung der Nutzung durch die Anzahl von Exemplaren,
Transporterfordernisse usw.). Diese Probleme werden aber
künstlich durch DRM am Leben erhalten.

Mass digitisation

The term “mass digitisation” is normally used to refer to
efforts by institutions such as libraries andarchives to
digitise (e.g. scan) the entire content or part of their
collections with an objective to preserve these collections
and, normally, to make them available to the public. Examples
are efforts by libraries to digitise novels form the early
partof the 20thcentury or whole collections of pictures of
historical value. This matter has been partly addressed at the
EU level by the 2011 Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) on key
principles on the digitisation and making available of out
of commerce works (i.e. works which are no longer found in the
normal channels of commerce), which is aiming to facilitate mass
digitisation efforts (for books and learned journals) on the
basis of licence agreements between libraries and similar
cultural institutions onthe one hand and the collecting
societies representing authors and publishers on the other44

You will find more information about his MoU on the following
website:http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/copyright/out-of-commerce/index_en.htm.

. Provided the required funding is ensured (digitisation
projects are extremely expensive), the result of this MoU
should be that books that are currently to be found only in
thearchives of, for instance, libraries will be digitised and
made available online to everyone. The MoU is based on
voluntary licences (granted by Collective Management
Organisations on the basis of the mandates they receive from
authors and publishers). Some Member States may need to enact
legislation to ensure the largest possible effect of such
licences (e.g. by establishing in legislation a presumption of
representation of a collecting society or the recognition of an
“extended effect” to the licences granted)45

France and Germany have already adopted legislation to back the
effects of the MoU.The French act (LOI n° 2012-287 du 1er mars
2012 relative à l'exploitation numérique des livres
indisponibles du xxe siècle) foresees collective
management,unless the author or publisher in question opposes
such management.The German act (Gesetz zur Nutzung verwaister
und vergriffener Werke und einer weiteren Änderung des
Urheberrechtsgesetzes vom 1.Oktober 2013) contains a legal
presumption of representation by a collecting society in
relation to works whose rightholders are not members of the
collecting society.

.

[In particular if you are an institutional user,engaging or
wanting to engage in mass digitisation projects, a right
holder, a collective management organisation:]Would it be
necessary in your country to enact legislation to ensure that
the results of the 2011 MoU (i.e. the agreements concluded
between libraries and collecting societies) have a cross-border
effect so that out of commerce workscan be accessed across the
EU?

 YES – Please explain why and how it could best be achieved

Die europäischen Kulturerbeeinrichtungen müssen dazu
verpflichtet werden, sämtliche Bestände digital zu
präsentieren. Nur der Hintergrund einer solchen Verpflichtung,
die imübrigen der legitimen Erwartung eines modernen
Stattsbürgers entspricht, versetzt die Einrichtungen in den
Stand, die MoU-Ziele überhaupt sinnvoll zu verfolgen und dann
eventuell auch zu erreichen.

 NO – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO OPINION

Would it be necessary to develop mechanisms, beyond those
already agreed for other types of content (e.g. for audio- or
audio-visual collections, broadcasters’ archives)?

YES – Pleaseexplain

Sämtliche Bestände sollen bereitgestellt werden, unabhängig
davon, in welcher medialen Form oder in welchem Format sie
vorliegen. Eine Unterscheidung nach Formaten ist logisch nicht
einsichtig.

NO – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO OPINION

Teaching

Directive 2001/29/EC46

Article 5(3)a of Directive 2001/29.

enables Member States to implement in their national legislation
limitations and exceptions for the purpose of illustration for
non-commercial teaching. Such exceptions would typically allow
a teacher to use parts of or full works to illustrate his
course, e.g. by distributing copies of fragments of a book or
of newspaper articles in the classroom or by showing protected
content ona smart board without having to obtain authorisation
from the right holders. The open formulation of this (optional)
provision allows for rather different implementation at Member
States level. The implementation of the exception differs from
Member Stateto Member State, with several Member States
providing instead a framework for the licensing of content for
certain educational uses. Some argue that the law should
provide for better possibilities for distance learning and
study at home.

(a)[Inparticular if you are an end user/consumer or an
institutional user:]Have you experienced specific problems when
trying to use works or other subject-matter for illustration for
teaching, including across borders?

(b)[In particular if you are a right holder:]Have you
experienced specific problems resulting from the way in which
works or other subject-matter are used for illustration for
teaching, including across borders?

 YES – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO

 NO OPINION

If there are problems, how would they best be solved?

[Open question]

Harmonisierung mit einer umfassenden Bildungsschranke für jede
Art von Format in jeder Art von Bildungssparte.

What mechanisms exist in themarket place to facilitate the use
of content for illustration for teaching purposes? How
successful are they?

[Open question]

Elektronische Handapparate und andere Formen der Bereitstellung
von Inhalten sind unter bestimmten Bedingungen erlaubt, aber
diese Bedingungen sind zu restriktiv.

If your view is that a legislative solution is needed, what
would be its main elements? Which activities of the beneficiary
institutions should be covered and under what conditions?

[Open question]

Eine umfassendeBildungsschranke ist für ein modernes
Funktionieren des Bildungssektors angesichts der modernen
Anforderungen, denen er entsprechen muss, um den ihm gestellten
Aufgaben zu genügen, unabdingbar.

If your view is that a different solution is needed, whatwould
it be?

[Open question]

Die Lösung ergibt sich aus der EU-weiten Harmonisierung und
Errichtung einer umfassenden Bildungsschranke für jede Art von
Format in jeder Art von Bildungssparte, so wie es den legitimen
Erwartungen der Bürgerinnen und Bürger in der Moderne angesichts
der technologischen Möglichkeiten und der gesellschaftlichen und
fachlichen Notwendigkeiten entspricht.

Research

Directive 2001/29/EC47

Article 5(3)a of Directive 2001/29.

enables Member States to choose whether to implement intheir
national laws a limitation for the purpose of non-commercial
scientific research. The open formulation of this (optional)
provision allows for rather different implementations at Member
States level.

(a)[In particular if you are an end user/consumer or an
institutional user:]Have you experienced specific problems when
trying to use works or other subject matter in the context of
research projects/activities, including across borders?

(b)[In particular if you are a right holder:]Have youexperienced
specific problems resulting from the way in which works or other
subject-matter are used in the context of research
projects/activities, including across borders?

YES – Please explain

Hauptsächlich DRM-Regelungen und technologisch unnötige
Verknappung digitaler Inhalte und technologisch unnötige
Verhinderung von Digitalisierung stellen Erschwernisse für die
Forschung dar.

 NO

 NO OPINION

If there are problems, how would they best be solved?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

What mechanisms exist in the Member States to facilitate the use
of content for research purposes? How successful are they?

[Open question]

Es gibt open-access-Initiativen, Nationallizenzen, Ansätze zu
einer Verpflichtung, mit öffentlichen Mitteln erstellte Inhalte
allgemein zugänglich zu machen, aber diese Maßnahmen sind noch
viel zu begrenzt.

Disabilities

Directive 2001/29/EC48

Article 5 (3)b of Directive 2001/29.

providesfor an exception/limitation for the benefit of people
with a disability. The open formulation of this (optional)
provision allows for rather different implementations at Member
States level. At EU and international level projects have been
launched to increase the accessibility of works and other
subject-matter for persons withdisabilities (notably by
increasing the number of works published in special formats and
facilitating their distribution across the European Union)49

The European Trusted Intermediaries Network (ETIN) resulting
from a Memorandum of Understanding between representatives of
the right-holder community (publishers, authors, collecting
societies) and interested parties such as associations for
blind and dyslexic persons
(http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/copyright/initiatives/access/index_en.htm)
and the Trusted Intermediary Global Accessible Resources (TIGAR)
project in WIPO (http://www.visionip.org/portal/en/).

.

The Marrakesh Treaty50

Marrakesh Treaty to Facilitate Access to Published Works by
Visually Impaired Persons and Persons with Print Disabilities,
Marrakesh, June 17 to 28 2013.

has been adopted to facilitate access to published works for
persons who are blind, visually impaired, or otherwise print
disabled. The Treaty creates a mandatory exception to copyright
that allows organisations for the blind to produce, distribute
and make available accessible format copies to visually
impaired persons without the authorisation of the rightholders.
The EU and its Member States have started work to sign and
ratify the Treaty. This may require the adoption of certain
provisions at EU level (e.g. to ensure the possibility to
exchange accessible format copies across borders).

(a)[In particular if you are a person with a disability or an
organisation representing persons with disabilities:]Have you
experienced problems with accessibility to content, including
across borders, arising from Member States’ implementation of
this exception?

(b)[In particular if you are an organisation providing services
for persons with disabilities:]Have you experienced problems
when distributing/communicating works published in special
formats across the EU?

(c)[In particular if you are a right holder:]Have you
experienced specific problems resulting from the application of
limitations or exceptions allowing for the
distribution/communication of works published in special
formats, including across borders?

 YES – Please explain by giving examples

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO

 NO OPINION

If there are problems, what could be done to improve
accessibility?

[Open question]

Die zügige Ratifizierung des Der WIPO-Vertrags von Marrakesch
zur Erleichterung des Zugriffs auf Publikationen für Personen,
die blind, sehbehindert oder anderweitig lesebehindert sind,
würde hier viel bringen.Es müssen aber auch weitere
Behinderungen berücksichtigt werden.

What mechanisms exist in the market place to facilitate
accessibility to content? How successful are they?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Text and datamining

Text and data mining/content mining/data analytics51

For the purpose of the present document, the term “text and data
mining” will be used.

are different terms used to describe increasingly important
techniques used in particular by researchers for the
exploration of vast amounts of existing texts and data (e.g.,
journals, web sites, databases etc.). Through the use of
software or other automated processes, an analysis is made of
relevant texts and data in order to obtain new insights,
patterns andtrends.

The texts and data used for mining are either freely accessible
on the internet or accessible through subscriptions to e.g.
journals and periodicals that give access to the databases of
publishers. A copy is made of the relevant texts and data (e.g.
on browser cache memories or in computers RAM memories or onto
the hard disk of a computer), prior to the actual analysis.
Normally, it is considered that to mine protected works or
other subject matter, it is necessary to obtain authorisation
from the right holders for the making of such copies unless
such authorisation can be implied (e.g. content accessible to
general public without restrictions on the internet, open
access).

Some argue that the copies required for text and data mining are
coveredby the exception for temporary copies in Article 5.1 of
Directive 2001/29/EC. Others consider that text and data mining
activities should not even be seen as covered by copyright. None
of this is clear, in particular since text and data mining does
not consist only of a single method, but can be undertaken in
several different ways. Important questions also remain as to
whether the main problems arising in relation to this issue go
beyond copyright (i.e. beyond the necessity or not to obtain
the authorisation to use content) and relate rather to the need
to obtain “access” to content (i.e. being able to use e.g.
commercial databases).

A specific Working Group was set up on this issue in the
framework of the "Licences for Europe" stakeholder dialogue. No
consensus was reached among participating stakeholders on either
the problems to be addressed or the results. At the same time,
practical solutions to facilitate text and data mining of
subscription-based scientific content were presented by
publishers as anoutcome of “Licences for Europe”52

See the document “Licences for Europe – ten pledges to bring
more content
online”:http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/copyright/docs/licences-for-europe/131113_ten-pledges_en.pdf.

. In the context of these discussions, other stakeholders argued
that no additional licences should be required to mine material
to which access has been provided through a subscription
agreement and considered that a specific exception for text and
data mining should be introduced, possibly on the basis of
a distinction between commercial and non-commercial.

(a)[In particular if you are an end user/consumer or an
institutionaluser:]Have you experienced obstacles, linked to
copyright, when trying to use text or data mining methods,
including across borders?

(b)[In particular if you are a service provider:]Have you
experienced obstacles, linked to copyright, when providing
services based on text or data mining methods, including across
borders?

(c)[In particular if you are a right holder:]Have you
experienced specific problems resulting from the use of text
and data mining in relation to copyright protected content,
includingacross borders?

 YES – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO – Please explain

Begrenzungen der Analyse von Datenbeständen sollten dort gelten,
wo es um den Schutz personenbezogener Daten geht.

NO OPINION

If there are problems, how would they best be solved?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

If your view is that a legislative solution is needed, what
would be its main elements? Whichactivities should be covered
and under what conditions?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

If your view is that a different solution is needed, what would
it be?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Are there other issues, unrelated to copyright, that constitute
barriers to the use of text or data mining methods?

Technische Schutzmechanismen (TPM) behindern die Datenanalyse.

User-generated content

Technological and service developments mean that citizens can
copy, use and distribute content at little to no financial
cost. As a consequence, new types of online activities are
developing rapidly, including the making of so-called
“user-generated content”. While users can create totally
original content, they can also take one or several
pre-existing works, change something in the work(s), and upload
the result on the Internet e.g. to platforms andblogs53

A typical example couldbe the “kitchen” or “wedding” video
(adding one's own video to a pre-existing sound recording), or
adding one's own text to a pre-existing photograph. Other
examples are “mash-ups” (blending two sound recordings), and
reproducing parts of journalistic work (report, review etc.) in
a blog.

. User-generated content (UGC) can thus cover the modification
of pre-existing works even if the newly-generated/"uploaded"
work does not necessarily require a creative effort and results
from merely adding, subtracting orassociating some pre-existing
content with other pre-existing content. This kind of activity
is not “new” as such. However, the development of social
networking and social media sites that enable users to share
content widely has vastly changed the scaleof such activities
and increased the potential economic impact for those holding
rights in the pre-existing works. Re-use is no longer the
preserve of a technically and artistically adept elite. With
the possibilities offered by the new technologies, re-use is
open to all, at no cost. This in turn raises questions with
regard to fundamental rights such the freedom of expression and
the right to property.

A specific Working Group was set up on this issue in the
framework of the "Licences for Europe" stakeholder dialogue. No
consensus was reached among participating stakeholders on either
the problems to be addressed or the results or even the
definition of UGC. Nevertheless, a wide range of views were
presented as to the best way to respond to this phenomenon. One
view was to say that a new exception is needed to cover UGC, in
particular non-commercial activities by individuals such as
combining existing musical works with videos, sequences of
photos, etc. Another view was that no legislative change is
needed:UGC is flourishing, and licensing schemes are
increasingly available (licence schemes concluded between
rightholders and platforms as well as micro-licences concluded
between rightholders and the users generating the content. In
any event, practical solutions to ease user-generated content
and facilitate micro-licensing for small users were pledged by
rightholders across different sectors as a result of the
“Licences for Europe” discussions54

See the document “Licences for Europe – ten pledges to bring
more content
online”:http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/copyright/docs/licences-for-europe/131113_ten-pledges_en.pdf.

.

(a)[In particular ifyou are an end user/consumer:]Have you
experienced problems when trying to use pre-existing works or
other subject matter to disseminate new content on the
Internet, including across borders?

(b)[In particular if you are a service provider:]Have you
experienced problems when users publish/disseminate new content
based on the pre-existing works or other subject-matter through
your service, including across borders?

(c)[In particular if you are a right holder:]Have you
experienced problems resulting from the way the users are using
pre-existing works or other subject-matter to disseminate new
content on the Internet, including across borders?

 YES – Please explain by giving examples

Jede Person, die Werke bearbeitet, Remixes or Mashups
produziert, istregelmäßig mit erheblichen prohibitiven
rechtlichen Belästigungen konfrontiert, und zwar um so mehr,
als Bestimmungen sich in unterschiedlichen Rechtsräumen
innerhalb der EU unterscheiden. Die mit der bestehenden
Situation verbundenen Unsicherheiten fungieren als Bremse und
Verhinderung des kreativen Prozesses sowie der Verbreitung
entstehender Inhalte.

 NO

 NO OPINION

(a)[In particular if you are an end user/consumer or a right
holder:]Have you experienced problems when trying to ensure
that thework you have created (on the basis of pre-existing
works) is properly identified for online use? Are proprietary
systems sufficient in this context?

(b)[In particular if you are a service provider:]Do you provide
possibilities for users that are publishing/disseminating the
works they have created (on the basis of pre-existing works)
through your service to properly identify these works for
online use?

 YES – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO OPINION

(a)[In particular if you are an end user/consumer or a right
holder):]Have you experienced problems when trying to be
remunerated for the use ofthe work you have created (on the
basis of pre-existing works)?

(b)[In particular if you are a service provider:]Do you provide
remuneration schemes for users publishing/disseminating the
works they have created (on the basis of pre-existing works)
through your service?

 YES – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO OPINION

If there are problems, howwould they best be solved?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

If your view is that a legislative solution is needed, what
would be its main elements? Which activities should be covered
and under what conditions?

[Open question]

Das Bearbeiten fremder Schöpfungen und das Schaffen derivativer
Werke sind von eminenter Bedeutung für den kreativen Prozess
und somit für die kulturellen Diskurs und die Kultur
überhaupt.Es muss für die entsprechendbenötigten
Rahmenbedingungen gesorgt werden.

If your view is that a different solution is needed, what would
it be?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Private copying and reprography

Directive2001/29/EC enables Member States to implement in their
national legislation exceptions or limitations to the
reproduction right for copies made for private use and
photocopying55

Article 5. 2)(a) and (b) of Directive 2001/29.

. Levies are charges imposed at national level on goods
typically used for such purposes (blank media, recording
equipment, photocopying machines, mobile listening devices such
as mp3/mp4 players, computers, etc.) with a view to compensating
rightholders for the harm they suffer when copies are made
without their authorisation by certain categories of persons
(i.e. natural persons making copies for their private use) or
through use of certain technique (i.e. reprography). In that
context, levies are important for rightholders.

With theconstant developments in digital technology, the
question arises as to whether the copying of files by
consumers/end-users who have purchased content online - e.g.
when a person has bought an MP3 file and goes on to store
multiple copies of that file (in her computer, her tablet and
her mobile phone) - also triggers, or should trigger, the
application of private copying levies. It is argued that, in
some cases, these levies may indeed be claimed by rightholders
whether or not the licence fee paid by the service provider
already covers copies made by the end user. This approach could
potentially lead to instances of double payments whereby levies
could be claimed on top of service providers’ licence fees56

Communication "Unleashing the Potential of Cloud Computing in
Europe", COM(2012) 529 final.

57

These issues were addressed in the recommendations of Mr António
Vitorino resulting from the mediation on private copying and
reprography levies. You can consult these recommendations on
the following
website:http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/copyright/docs/levy_reform/130131_levies-vitorino-recommendations_en.pdf.

.

There is also anon-going discussion as to the application or not
of levies to certain types of cloud-based services such as
personal lockers or personal video recorders.

In your view, is there a need to clarify at the EU level the
scope and application of the private copying and reprography
exceptions58

Art. 5.2(a) and 5.2(b) of Directive 2001/29/EC.

in the digital environment?

YES – Please explain

Verglichen mit dem Besitz analoger Medien lassen die
Verhältnisse bei digitalen Medien teilweise an eine Enteignung
denken, weil das Verfügen über legal erworbene Inhalte nicht
durch inhärente physikalische Merkmale und eine gesetzliche
Regelung zur Anzahl erlaubterPrivatkopien, sondern in
unterschiedlichem Ausmaß über diverse willkürlich von
Anbieternden Daten hinzugefügteKonrollmechanismen (DRM)
begrenzt ist.

 NO – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO OPINION

Should digital copies made by end users for private purposes in
the context of a service that has beenlicensed by rightholders,
and where the harm to the rightholder is minimal, be subject to
private copying levies?59

This issue was also addressed in the recommendations of Mr
Antonio Vitorino resulting from the mediation on private
copying and reprographylevies

 YES – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO – Please explain

Für die Benutzung dessen, was legal erworben wurde, sollte man
nicht zahlen müssen.

 NO OPINION

How would changes in levieswith respect to the application to
online services (e.g. services based on cloud computing
allowing, for instance, users to have copies on different
devices) impact the development and functioning of new business
models on the one hand and rightholders’revenue on the other?

[Open question]

Für die Geschäftsmodelle der Kryptologen und Entwickler von
Kontrolltechnik wäre das hervorragend. Für alle anderen würden
sich solche Regelungen bremsend und verhindernd auswirken, weil
mit ihnen wiederum ein Bereichder Uneinheitlichkeit und
Unsicherheit entstehen würde, der diese Dienstleistungen
unattraktiv macht.

Would you see an added value in making levies visible on the
invoices for products subject to levies?60

This issue was also addressed in the recommendations of Mr
Antonio Vitorino resulting from the mediation on private
copying and reprography levies.

YES – Please explain

Selbstverständlich. Wenn schon solch ein System angewandt wird,
muss wenigstens klar erkennbar sein, wann man genau warum und
wofür zahlt.Welch eine Frage.

 NO – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO OPINION

Diverging national systems levy different products and apply
different tariffs. This results in obstacles to the
freecirculation of goods and services in the Single Market. At
the same time, many Member States continue to allow the
indiscriminate application of private copying levies to all
transactions irrespective of the person to whom the product
subject to a levy issold (e.g. private person or business). In
that context, not all Member States have ex ante exemption
and/or ex post reimbursement schemes which could remedy these
situations and reduce the number of undue payments61

This issue was also addressed in therecommendations of Mr
Antonio Vitorino resulting from the mediation on private
copying and reprography levies.

.

Have you experienced a situation where a cross-border
transaction resulted in undue levy payments, or duplicate
payments of the same levy, orother obstacles to the free
movement of goods or services?

 YES – Please specify the type of transaction and indicate
the percentage of the undue payments. Please also indicate how
a priori exemption and/or ex post reimbursement schemes could
help to remedy the situation.

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO – Please explain

Ich vermeide so weit wie möglich den Kauf von Medien, Inhalten
oder Geräten, weil mir genau aus den Gründen, die in der Frage
anklingen, die Situation zu unübersichtlich ist.

 NO OPINION

What percentage of products subject to a levy is sold to persons
other than natural persons for purposes clearly unrelated to
private copying? Do any of those transactions result in undue
payments? Pleaseexplain in detail the example you provide (type
of products, type of transaction, stakeholders, etc.).

[Open question]

Die Verwerter werden natürlich die Summe der Abgaben, die
unberechtigt erhoben werden, und den entsprechenden Anteil an
verkauften Geräten sehr gering schätzen.Wie will man die
tatsächlichen Zahlen ermitteln?

Where such undue payments arise, what percentage of trade do
they affect? To what extent could a priori exemptions and/or ex
post reimbursement schemes existing in some Member States help
to remedy the situation?

[Open question]

Wie soll man feststellen, welche Handelsanteile hier betroffen
sind? Und wie sollen Freistellungen und Erstattungen zum
Beispiel einer Privatperson nutzen, die keine Privatkopien
herstellt? Soll diese Person ihren gesamten Datenumsatz
dokumentieren und mit der Steuererklärung einreichen?

If you have identified specific problems with the current
functioning of the levy system, how would these problems best
be solved?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Fair remuneration of authors and performers

The EU copyright acquis recognises for authors and performers a
number of exclusive rights and, in the case of performers whose
performances are fixed in phonograms, remuneration rights. There
are few provisions in the EU copyright law governing
thetransferof rights from authors or performers to producers62

See e.g. Directive 92/100/EEC, Art.2(4)-(7).

or determining who the owner of therights is when the work or
other subject matter is created in the context of an employment
contract63

See e.g. Art. 2.3. of Directive 2009/24/EC, Art. 4 of Directive
96/9/EC.

. This is an area that has been traditionally left for Member
States to regulateand there are significant differences in
regulatory approaches. Substantial differences also exist
between different sectors of the creative industries.

Concerns continue to be raised that authors and performers are
not adequately remunerated, in particular but not solely, as
regards online exploitation. Many consider that the economic
benefit of new forms of exploitation is not being fairly shared
along the whole value chain. Another commonly raised issue
concerns contractual practices, negotiation mechanisms,
presumptions of transfer of rights, buy-out clauses and the
lack of possibility to terminate contracts. Some stakeholders
are of the opinion that rules at national level do not suffice
to improve their situation and that action at EU level is
necessary.

[In particular if you are an author/performer:] What is the best
mechanism (or combination of mechanisms) to ensure that you
receive an adequate remuneration for the exploitation of your
works and performances?

[Open question]

Die Frage ist, wiedie Bezahlung von Kreativität überhaupt
geregelt werden sollte.

Is there a need to act at the EU level (for instance to prohibit
certain clauses in contracts)?

 YES – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO – Please explain why

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO OPINION

If you consider that the current rules are not effective, what
would you suggest to address the shortcomings you identify?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Respect for rights

Directive 2004/48/EE64

Directive 2004/48/EC of the European Parliament and of the
Council of 29 April 2004 on theenforcement of intellectual
property rights.

provides for a harmonised framework for the civil enforcement of
intellectual property rights, including copyright and related
rights. The Commission has consulted broadly on this text65

You will find more information on the following
website:http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/iprenforcement/directive/index_en.htm

. Concerns have been raised as to whether some of its provisions
are still fit to ensure a proper respect for copyright in the
digital age. On the one hand, the current measures seem to be
insufficient to deal with the new challenges brought by the
dissemination of digital content on the internet; on the other
hand, there are concerns about the current balance between
enforcement of copyright and the protection of fundamental
rights, in particular the right for a private life and data
protection. While it cannot be contested that enforcement
measures should always be available in case of infringement of
copyright, measures could be proposed to strengthen respect for
copyright when the infringed content is used for a commercial
purpose66

For example when the infringing content is offered on a website
which gets advertising revenues that depend on the volume of
traffic.

. One means to do this could be to clarify the role of
intermediaries in the IP infrastructure67

This clarification should not affect the liability regime of
intermediary service providers established by Directive
2000/31/EC on electronic commerce, which will remain unchanged.

. At the same time, there could be clarification of the
safeguards for respect of private life and data protection for
private users.

Should the civil enforcement system in theEU be rendered more
efficient for infringements of copyright committed with a
commercial purpose?

 YES – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO – Please explain

Die Verfolgung und Bestrafung von"Verstößen" scheint schon jetzt
oft recht drastisch zu sein. Gesetzestreue hängt aber auch davon
ab, dass die Regelungen praktikabel sind und vonBürgerinnen und
Bürgern als fair, einleuchtend und gesamtgesellschaftlich
nützlich empfunden werden.

 NO OPINION

In particular, is the current legal framework clear enough to
allow for sufficient involvement of intermediaries (such as
Internet service providers, advertising brokers, payment
service providers, domain name registrars, etc.) in inhibiting
onlinecopyright infringements with a commercial purpose? If
not, what measures would be useful to foster the cooperation of
intermediaries?

[Open question]

Es ist nicht sinnvoll, dass Vermittler als Teil einer
Internetpolizei requiriert werden. Es kommt sonst dazu, dass
sie aus Unsicherheit, weil sie befürchten zur Verantwortung
gezogen zu werden, als Zensoren auftreten, wodurch Kreativität
und Innovation und letzten Endes die freie Meinungsäußerung
bedroht werden.

Does the current civil enforcement frameworkensure that the
right balance is achieved between the right to have one’s
copyright respected and other rights such as the protection of
private life and protection of personal data?

 YES – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO – Please explain

Verbraucherrechte und informationelle Teilhabe kommen zu kurz.
Kreativität, Innovation und gesamtgesellschaftlicher Nutzen
spielen eine zu geringe Rolle.

 NO OPINION

A single EU Copyright Title

The idea of establishing a unified EU Copyright Title has been
present in the copyright debate for quite some time now,
although views as to the merits and the feasibility of such an
objective are divided. A unified EU Copyright Title would
totally harmonise the area of copyright law in the EU and
replace national laws. There would then be a single EU title
instead of a bundle of national rights. Some see this as the
only manner in which a truly Single Market for content
protected by copyright can be ensured, while others believe
that the same objective can better be achieved by establishing
a higher level of harmonisation while allowing for a certain
degree of flexibility and specificity in Member States’ legal
systems.

Should the EU pursue the establishment of a single EU Copyright
Title, as a means of establishing a consistent framework for
rights and exceptions to copyright across the EU, as well as a
single framework for enforcement?

 YES

 NO

 NO OPINION

Should this be the next step in thedevelopment of copyright in
the EU? Does the current level of difference among the Member
State legislation mean that this is a longer term project?

[Open question]

Die Harmonisierung muss so schnell wie möglich – aber nicht auf
Kosten derVerbraucherrechte – erfolgen.

Other issues

The above questionnaire aims to provide a comprehensive
consultation on the most important matters relating to the
current EU legal framework for copyright. Should any important
matters have been omitted, we would appreciate if you could
bring them to our attention, so they can be properly addressed
in the future.

Are there any other important matters related to the EU legal
framework for copyright? Please explain and indicate how such
matters should be addressed.

[Open question]

Es muss dringend klargestellt werden, dass das Reproduzieren
gemeinfreier zweidimensionaler Werke keine neuen Rechte
hervorbringt. Die freie Verwendung verwaister Werke und aller
von öffentlichen Einrichtungen und mit öffentlichen
Mittelnerstellter Inhalte und die strengere Anwendung des
Kriteriums der Schöpfungshöhe sind dringende Erfordernisse für
eine funktionierende Kreativität und Innovation.
Verbraucherrechte müssen gestärkt, DRM muss eingedämmt werden.
Wo technische Schutzmaßnahmen(TPM) ungerechtfertigt sind, muss
auch ihre Umgehung strafffrei sein. Dagegen müssen auch
implizite Rechtsanmaßungen durch TPM geahndet werden. Bei der
Verhandlung internationaler Vereinbarungen muss besser darauf
geachtet werden, dass die informationelleTeilhabe und der
kulturelle Diskurs nicht eingeschränkt werden. Das Verschwinden
von Inhalten im Namen der Stärkung des intellektuellen Eigentums
muss im Interesse der allgemeinen Informationsversorgung beendet
werden. Die aktuellen und vorhersehbaren Anforderungen an unsere
Zivilisation können nur bewältigt werden, wenn wir
Wissenszugänge so weit offen wie möglich halten und die
Auseinandersetzung über alle relevanten Inhalte in
wissenschaftlicher, künstlerischer und allgemein-menschlicher
Form fördern und nicht behindern.

