


PLEASE IDENTIFY YOURSELF:

Name:

In the interests of transparency, organisations (including, for
example,NGOs,trade associations and commercial enterprises) are
invited to provide the public with relevant information about
themselves by registering in the Interest Representative
Register and subscribing to its Code of Conduct.

•If you are a Registered organisation, please indicate your
Register ID number below. Your contribution will then be
considered as representing the views of your organisation.

•If your organisation is notregistered, you have the
opportunity toregister now. Responses from organisations not
registered will be published separately.

If you would like to submit your reply on an anonymous basis
please indicate it belowby underlining the followinganswer:

•Yes, I would like to submit my reply on an anonymous basis

TYPE OF RESPONDENT(Pleaseunderlinethe appropriate):

End user/consumer(e.g. internet user, reader, subscriber to
music or audiovisualservice,researcher, student)OR
Representative of end users/consumers

for the purposes of this questionnaire normally referred to in
questions as"end users/consumers"

Institutional user(e.g. school, university, research centre,
library, archive)OR Representative of institutional users

^ for the purposes of this questionnaire normally referred to in
questions as"institutional users"

Author/Performer OR Representative of authors/performers

Publisher/Producer/Broadcaster  OR  Representative  of

publishers/producers/broadcasters

the two above categoriesare, for the purposes of this
questionnaire, normallyreferred to in questions as"right
holders"

Intermediary/Distributor/Other service provider(e.g. online
music or audiovisualservice, games platform, social media,
search engine, ICT industry)OR Representative of
intermediaries/distributors/other service providers

for the purposes of this questionnaire normally referred to in
questions as"service providers"

Collective Management Organisation

Public authority

Member State

Other(Please explain):

[In particular if you are an end user/consumer:]Have you faced
problems when trying to access online services in anEUMember
State other than the onein which you live?

YES-Please provide examples indicating the Member State, the
sector and the type of content concerned (e.g. premium content
such as certain films and TV series, audio-visual content in
general, music, e-books, magazines, journals and newspapers,
games, applications and other software)

□NO

□NO OPINION

[Inparticular if you are a service provider:]Have you faced
problems when seeking to provide online services across borders
intheEU?

YES-Please explain whether such problems, in your experience,
are related to copyright or to other issues (e.g. business
decisions relating to the cost of providing services across
borders, compliance with other laws such as consumer
protection)? Please provide examples indicating the Member
State, the sector and the type of content concerned (e.g.
premium content such as certain films and TV series,
audio-visual content in general, music, e-books,

□NO

□NO OPINION

[In particular if you are a right holder or a collective
management organisation:]How often are you asked to grant
multi-territorial licences? Please indicate, if possible, the
number of requests per year and provide examples indicating the
Member State, the sector and the type of content concerned.

NO OPINION

If you have identified problems in the answers to any of the
questions above—what would be the best way to tackle them?

NO OPINION

[In particular if you are a right holder or a collective
management organisation:]Are there reasons why, even in cases
where you hold allthenecessary rights for alltheterritories in
question, you would still find it necessary or justified to
impose territorial restrictions on a service provider (in
order, for instance, to ensure that access to certain content
is not possible in certain European countries)?

□YES-Please explain by giving examples

□NO

□NO OPINION

[In particularif you are e.g. a broadcaster or a service
provider:]Are there reasons why, even in cases where you have
acquired all the necessary rights for all the territories in
question, you would still find it necessaryor justified to
impose territorial restrictions onthe servicerecipient (in
order for instance, to redirecttheconsumer to a different
website thantheone he is trying to access)?

YES-Please explain by giving examples

NO

□NO OPINION

Do you think that further measures (legislative or
non-legislative, including market- led solutions) are needed at
EU level to increasethecross-border availability of
contentservicesintheSingle Market, while ensuring an adequate
level of protection for right holders?

□YES-Please explain□NO-Please explain□NO OPINION

Is the scope of the"making available"right in cross-border
situations— i.e.when content is disseminated across
borders—sufficiently clear?

□YES

NO-Please explain how this could be clarified and what type of
clarification would be required (e.g. as in "targeting"
approach explained above, as in "country of origin" approach1

The objective of implementing a "country of origin" approach is
to localise the copyright relevant act that must be licenced in
a single Member State (the "country of origin", which could be
for example the Member State in which the content is uploaded
or where the service provider is established), regardless of in
how many Member States the work can be accessed or received.
Such an approach has already been introduced atEUlevel with
regard to broadcasting by satellite (see Directive 93/83/EEC on
the coordination of certain rules concerning copyright and
rights related to copyright applicable to satellite
broadcasting and cable retransmission).

)

Country of origin approach

□NOopinion

7.[In particular if you are a right holder:]Could a
clarification of theterritorial scope of the"making available"
right have an effect on the recognition of your rights (e.g.
whether you are considered to be an author or not, whether you
are considered to have transferred your rights or not), on your
remuneration, or on theenforcement of rights (including the
availability of injunctive relief2

Injunctive relief is a temporary or permanent remedy allowing
the right holder to stop or prevent an infringement of his/her
right.

)?

□YES-Please explain how such potential effects could be
addressed

□NO

□NO OPINION

[In particular if you a service provider or a right holder:]Does
the application of two rights to a single act of economic
exploitation in the online environment (e.g. a download) create
problems for you?

□YES-Please explain what type of measures would be needed in
order to address such problems (e.g. facilitation of joint
licences when the rights are in differenthands, legislation to
achieve the "bundling of rights")

□NO

□NO OPINION

Should the provision of a hyperlink leading to a work or other
subject matter protected under copyright, either in general or
under specific circumstances, be subject to the authorisation
of the rightholder?

YES-Please explain whether you consider this to be the case in
general, or under specific circumstances, and why

□NO-Please explain whether you consider this to be the case in
general, or under specific circumstances, and why (e.g. because
it does not amount to an act of communication to the public-or
to a new public, or because it should be covered by a copyright
exception)

Het internet bestaat bijde gratievan hyperlinks.Het
verschaftinternauteneen wegwijzer naar informatie en dient dan
ook beschermd te worden op basis van het grondrecht van toegang
tot informatie (zoals beschermd door art.10EVRM). Het kan dan
ook niet dat het louter linken naar auteursrechtelijk beschermd
materiaal ook als eenauteursrechtelijk relevante handeling wordt
gekwalificeerd. Indien het Hof van Justitie toch in die zin zou
oordelen dan dient het linken onder een auteursrechtelijke
uitzondering te vallen.

Diezelfde opmerking kan ook worden gemaakt voor het embedden
vanbeschermd materiaal op sociale media zoals bvbPinterest.Ook
het embedden dient als een niet auteursrechtelijk relevante
handeling te worden beschouwd, minstens te worden toegelaten op
basis van een uitzondering op het auteursrecht.

□NO OPINION

Should the viewingofaweb-pagewhere this implies the temporary
reproduction of a work or other subject matter protected under
copyright on the screen and in the cache memory of the user's
computer, either in general or under specific circumstances, be
subject to the authorisation of the rightholder?

YES-Please explain whether you consider this to be the case in
general, or under specific circumstances, and why

ΠNO-Please explain whether youconsider this to be the case in
general, or under specific circumstances, and why (e.g. because
it is or should be covered by a copyright exception)

Dit dient beschouwd te worden als een tijdelijke/technische
reproductiehandeling in de zin van art.5.1Auteursrechtrichtlijn
2001/29/EG en dus onder een uitzondering te vallen

□NO OPINION

[In particular if you are an end user/consumer:]Have you faced
restrictions when trying to resell digital files that you have
purchased (e.g. mp3 file, e-book)?

□YES-Please explain by giving examples

□NO

□NO OPINION

[In particular if you are a right holder or a service provider:]
What would be the consequences of providing a legal framework
enablingtheresale of previously purchaseddigital content?
Please specify per market (type of content) concerned.

NO OPINION

Would the creation of a registration system atEUlevel help in
the identification and licensing of works and other subject
matter?

□YES

□NO

□NO OPINION

What would be the possible advantages of such a system?

Het klarenvanrechten zou veel efficiënter kunnen verlopen. Nu
worden veel werken door kunstorganisaties niet gebruikt omdat
de juiste rechthebbenden vaak moeilijk of niet kunnen worden
gevonden. Een dergelijk systeem zou onmiddellijk alle
noodzakelijke informatie beschikbaar kunnen stellen. Het is
dienaangaande bovendien belangrijk dat ook de transfer van
rechten wordt geregistreerd. Deze registratie zou het probleem
van toekomstige verweesde werken kunnen oplossen.

What would be the possible disadvantages of such a system?

Geen

What incentives for registration by rightholders could be
envisaged?

De vraag stelt zich of rechthebbendenhiervoor veel
aanmoedigingen moeten krijgen. Een dergelijk systeem bestaat
ook in het kader van andere intellectuele eigendomsrechten
(zoals merken, patenten, modellen etc.) waarbij de
rechthebbenden hiertoe gewoonweg verplicht worden zonder het
verkrijgen van enige aanmoediging.

Anderzijds hebben rechthebbenden hier alleen maar voordelen bij.
Zij zullen immers sneller kunnen gevonden worden waardoor hun
inkomsten voor gebruik potentieel kunnen stijgen.

Een mogelijke stimulans-gekoppeld weliswaar aan eenminder lange
auteursrechtelijke beschermingstermijn dan op vandaag (zie
vraag20) -is een verlenging van de auteursrechtelijke
beschermingstermijn door deze registratie.

What should be the role of theEUin promoting the adoption of
identifiers in the content sector, and in promoting the
development and interoperability of rights ownership and
permissions databases?

NO OPINION

Are the current terms of copyright protection still appropriate
in the digital environment?

□YES-Please explain

□NO-Please explain if they should be longer or shorter

De auteursrechtelijke beschermingstermijnisoverdrevenlang
geworden.Voor kunstorganisaties is hethierdoor vaak onmogelijk
om werken te gebruiken, ook al betreft het vaak werken die
commercieel niet (meer) exploiteerbaar zijn. De meerkost om de
rechten te klaren weegt dan ook niet op tegen de voordelen van
deze lange beschermingstermijn. Deze termijndient dus in ieder
geval teruggeschroefd te worden naar de beschermingstermijn
uitde BernerConventie van50jaar p.m.a

Idealiter dient de beschermingstermijn in het auteursrecht even
lang te zijn als in het octrooirecht(20jaar). Deze termijn kan
eventueel verlengd worden tot de beschermingstermijn van50jaar
p.m.a. op voorwaarde dat de auteursrechthebbenden zijn werk
laat registeren (zie vraag17-18).Hierdoor zullen veel werken
sneller in het publiek domein vallen en enkel de economisch
interessante werken beschermd blijven. De EU wordt dan ook
gevraagd dit op internationaal vlak, in het kader van een
mogelijke herziening vande BernerConventie, bespreekbaar te
maken.

□NO OPINION

Are there problems arising from the fact that most limitations
andexceptions provided in theEUcopyright directives are
optional for the Member States?

□YES-Please explain by referring to specific cases

□NO-Please explain

□NO OPINION

Shouldsome/all of the exceptions bemade mandatory and, if so, is
there a need for a higher level ofharmonisationof such
exceptions?

□YES-Please explain by referring to specific cases

□NO-Please explain

□NO OPINION

Should any new limitations and exceptions be added to or removed
from the existing catalogue? Please explain by referring to
specific cases.

NO OPINION

Independently from the questions above, is there a need to
provide for a greater degree offlexibility in theEUregulatory
framework for limitations and exceptions?

□YES-Please explain why

Het is absoluut noodzakelijk dat uitzonderingen op het
auteursrecht op een meer flexibele wijze kunnen worden
toegepast. De uitzonderingen zijn immers niet geformuleerd in
een technologie neutrale manier en kunnendan ook niet worden
toegepast op onbekende gebruiksvormen ten tijde van de redactie
van de uitzondering. Technologische evoluties volgen zich echter
zo snel op dat vaak niet kan worden gewacht op de wetgever om
bestaande uitzonderingen hieraan aan te passen. Hierdoor komt
beschermd materiaal ook veel sneller beschikbaar voor de
creatieve industrie

□NO-Please explain why

□NO OPINION

If yes, what would be the best approach to provide for
flexibility? (e.g. interpretation by national courts and the EC
J, periodic revisions of the directives, interpretations by the
Commission, built-in flexibility, e.g. in the form of a
fair-use or fair dealing provision/open norm, etc.)? Please
explainindicating what would be the relative advantages and
disadvantages of such an approach as well as its possible
effects onthefunctioning oftheInternal Market.

Eenopen norm,zoals eenfair useuitzonderingisnoodzakelijk.
Dezeopen normdienttebestaan naast een vaste lijst van
uitzonderingen. Hierdoor kan een rechtscollege bepaalde
gebruiken die in se van niet-commerciële aard zijn en de
belangen van de rechthebbenden nauwelijks schaden toelaten.
Minstens dient, in afwijking van de rechtspraak van het Hof van
Justitie, worden gesteld dat uitzonderingen niet op een
restrictieve manier moeten worden uitgelegd, zodat zij naar
analogie door de nationale rechtscolleges op gelijkaardige
gebruiken kunnen worden toegepast.

Does the territoriality of limitations and exceptions, in your
experience, constitute aproblem?

□YES-Please explain why and specify which exceptions you are
referring to□NO-Please explain why and specify which exceptions
you are referring toΠNOOPINION

In the eventthat limitations and exceptions established at
national level were to have cross-border effect, how should the
question of "fair compensation"be addressed, when such
compensation is part of the exception? (e.g. who pays whom,
where?)

NO OPINION

(a)[In particular if you are an institutional user:]Have you
experienced specific problems when trying to use an exception
to preserve and archive specific works or other subject matter
in your collection?

(b)[In particular if youare a right holder:]Have you experienced
problems with the use by libraries, educational establishments,
museum or archives of the preservation exception?

□YES-Please explain, by Member State, sector, and the type of
use in question.

□NO

□NO OPINION

If there are problems, how would they best be solved?

NO OPINION

If your view is that a legislativesolution is needed, what would
be its main elements? Which activities of the beneficiary
institutions should be covered and under which conditions?

NO OPINION

If your view is that a different solution is needed, what would
it be?

NO OPINION

(a)[In particular if you are an institutional user:]Have you
experienced specific problems when trying to negotiate
agreements with rights holders that enable you to provide
remote access, including across borders, toyour collections (or
parts thereof) for purposes of research and private study?

[In particular if you are an end user/consumer:]Have you
experienced specific problems when trying to consult, including
across borders, works and other subject-matter held
inthecollections of institutions such as universities and
national libraries when you are not on the premises of the
institutions in question?

[In particular if you are a right holder:]Have you negotiated
agreements with institutional users thatenable those
institutions to provide remote access, including across
borders, to the works or other subject-matter in their
collections, for purposes of research and private study?

NO OPINION

If there are problems, how would theybest be solved?

NO OPINION

If your view is that a legislative solution is needed, what
would be its main elements? Which activities of the beneficiary
institutions should be covered and under which conditions?

NO OPINION

If your view is that a different solution is needed, what would
it be?

NO OPINION

(a)[In particular if you are a library:]Have you experienced
specific problems when trying to negotiate agreements to enable
the electronic lending (e-lending), including across borders, of
books or other materials held in your collection?

[In particular if you are an end user/consumer:]Have you
experienced specific problems when trying to borrow books or
other materials electronically (e-lending), including across
borders, from institutions such as public libraries?

[In particular if you are a right holder:]Have you negotiated
agreements with libraries to enable them to lend books or other
materials electronically, including across borders?

□YES-Please explain with specific examples

□NO

□NO OPTNTON

If there are problems, how would they best be solved?

NO OPINION

The following two questions are relevant both to this point
(n03)and the previous one (n02).

[In particular if you are an institutional user:]What
differences do you see in the management of physical and online
collections, including providing access to your subscribers?
What problems have you encountered?

NO OPINION

[In particular if you are a right holder:]What difference do you
see between libraries' traditional activities such as
on-premises consultation or public lending and activities such
as off-premises (online, at a distance) consultation and
e-lending? What problems have you encountered?

NO OPINION

[In particular if you are an institutional user, engaging or
wanting to engage in massdigitisation projects, a rightholder,
a collective management organisation:]Would it be necessary in
your country to enact legislation to ensure that the results of
the2011MoU(i.e.the agreements concluded between libraries and
collecting societies) have across­bordereffect so that out of
commerce works can be accessed across theEU?

□YES-Please explain why and how it could best be achieved

□NO-Please explain

□NO OPINION

Would it benecessary to develop mechanisms,beyond those already
agreed for other types of content (e.g. for audio- or
audio-visual collections, broadcasters' archives)?

□YES-Please explain

□NO-Please explain

□NO OPINION

(a)[In particular if you are anend user/consumer or an
institutional user:]Have you experienced specific problems when
trying to use works or other subject-matter for illustration for
teaching, including across borders?

(b)[In particular if youarea right holder:]Have you experienced
specific problems resulting from the way in which works or
other subject-matter are used for illustration for teaching,
including across borders?

□YES-Please explain

De uitzonderingen zijn aan te strikte voorwaarden onderworpen
zodat ze zelden kunnen toegepast worden

□NO

□NOOPINION

If there are problems, how would they best be solved?

Gebruikvanbeschermd materiaal voor allemogelijke
onderwijsdoeleinden dient toegelaten te zijn, voor zover de
normale exploitatie van het werk niet in het gedrang komt

What mechanisms exist inthemarket place to facilitatetheuse of
content forillustration forteachingpurposes? How successful are
they?

NO OPINION

If your view is that a legislative solution is needed, what
would be its main elements? Which activities of the beneficiary
institutions should be covered and under what conditions?

Gebruikvanbeschermd materiaal voor alle mogelijke
onderwijsdoeleinden dient toegelaten te zijn, voor zover de
normale exploitatie van het werk niet in het gedrang komt

If your view is that a different solution is needed, what would
it be?

NO OPINION

(a)[In particular if you are an end user/consumer or an
institutional user:]Have you experienced specific problems when
trying to use works or other subject matter in the context of
research projects/activities, including across borders?

(b)[In particular if you are a right holder:]Have you
experienced specific problems resulting from the way in which
works or other subject-matter are used in the context of
research projects/activities, including across borders?

□YES-Please explain

□NO

□NO OPINION

If there are problems, how would they best be solved?

NO OPINION

What mechanisms exist in the Member States to facilitate the use
of content for research purposes? How successful are they?

NO OPINION

(a)[In particular if you area person with a disability or an
organisation representingpersons with disabilities:]Have you
experienced problems with accessibility to content, including
across borders, arising from Member States' implementation of
this exception?

[In particularif you are an organisation providing services for
persons with disabilities:]Have you experienced problems when
distributing/communicating works published in special formats
across the EU?

[In particular if you are a right holder:]Have you experienced
specific problems resulting from the application of limitations
or exceptions allowing for the distribution/communication of
works published in special formats, including across borders?

□YES-Please explain□NO

□NO OPTNTON

If there are problems, what could be done to improve
accessibility?

NO OPINION

What mechanisms exist in the market place to facilitate
accessibility to content? How successful are they?

NO OPINION

(a)[In particular if you are an end user/consumer or an
institutional user:]Have you experienced obstacles, linked to
copyright, when trying to use text or data mining methods,
including across borders?

[In particular if you are a service provider:]Have you
experienced obstacles, linked to copyright, when
providingservicesbased on text or data mining methods,
including across borders?

[In particular if you are a right holder:]Have you experienced
specific problems resulting from the use of text and data
mining in relation to copyright protected content, including
across borders?

□YES-Please explain

□NO-Please explain

□NO OPTNTON

If there are problems, how would they best be solved?

NO OPINION

If your view is that a legislative solution is needed, what
would be its main elements? Which activities should be covered
and under what conditions?

NO OPINION

If your view is that a different solution isneeded, what would
it be?

NO OPINION

^re there otherissues, unrelated to copyright, that constitute
barriers to the use of text or data mining methods?

NO OPINION

(a)[In particular if you are anend user/consumer:]Have you
experienced problems when trying to use pre-existing works or
other subject matter to disseminate new content on the
Internet, including across borders?

[In particular if you are a service provider:]Have you
experiencedproblems when users publish/disseminate new content
based on the pre-existing works or other subject-matter through
your service, including across borders?

[In particular if you are a right holder:]Have you experienced
problems resulting from the waythe users are using pre-existing
works or other subject-matter to disseminate new content on the
Internet, including across borders?

□YES-Please explain by giving examples

□NO

NO OPTNTON

(a)[In particular if you are an end user/consumer or a right
holder:]Have you experienced problems when trying to ensure
that the work you have created (on the basis of pre-existing
works) is properly identified for online use? Are proprietary
systems sufficient in this context?

(b)[In particular if you are a service provider:]Do you provide
possibilities for users that are publishing/disseminating the
works they have created (on the basis of pre-existing works)
through your service to properly identify these works for
online use?

□YES-Please explain

□NO-Please explain

NO OPTNTON

(a)[In particular if you are an end user/consumer or a right
holder):]Have you experienced problems when trying to be
remunerated fortheuse ofthework you have created (on the basis
of pre-existing works)?

(b)[In particular if youarea service provider:]Do you provide
remuneration schemes for users publishing/disseminating the
works they have created (on the basis of pre-existing works)
throughyour service?

□YES-Please explain

□NO-Please explain

NO OPTNTON

If there are problems, how would they best be solved?

NO OPINION

If your view is that a legislativesolution is needed, what would
be its mainelements?Which activities should be covered and under
what conditions?

NO OPINION

If your view is that a different solution is needed, what would
it be?

NO OPINION

In yourview, is therea need to clarify at theEUlevel the scope
and application ofthe private copying and reprography
exceptions3

Art. 5.2(a) and 5.2(b) of Directive 2001/29/EC.

in the digital environment?

□YES-Please explain

□NO-Please explain

□NO OPINION

Should digital copies made by end users for private purposes in
the context of a service that has been licensed by
rightholders, and where the harm to the rightholder is minimal,
be subject to private copying levies?4

This issue was also addressed in the recommendations of Mr
AntonioVitorinoresulting from the mediation on private copying
and reprography levies

YES-Please explain

NO-Please explain

NO OPTNTON

Howwould changes in levies withrespect to the application to
online services (e.g. services based on cloud computing
allowing, for instance, users to have copies on different
devices) impact the development and functioning of new business
models on the one hand and rightholders'revenue on the other?

NO OPINION

Would you see an added value in making levies visible on the
invoices for products subject to levies?5

This issue was also addressed in the recommendations of Mr
AntonioVitorinoresulting from the mediationon private copying
and reprography levies.

□YES-Please explain

□NO-Please explain

□NO OPINION

Have you experienced a situation where a cross-border
transaction resulted in undue levy payments, or duplicate
payments of the same levy, or other obstacles to the free
movement of goods orservices?

YES-Please specify the type of transaction and indicate the
percentage of the undue payments. Please also indicate how a
priori exemption and/orex post reimbursement schemes could help
to remedy the situation.

□NO-Please explain

NO OPTNTON

What percentage of products subjectto a levy is sold to persons
other than natural persons for purposes clearly unrelated to
private copying? Do any of those transactions result in undue
payments? Please explain in detail the example you provide
(type of products, type of transaction, stakeholders, etc.).

NO OPINION

Where such undue payments arise, what percentage of trade do
they affect? To what extent could a priori exemptions and/or ex
post reimbursement schemes existingin some Member States help to
remedy the situation?

NO OPINION

If you have identified specific problems with the current
functioning of the levy system, how would these problems best
be solved?

NO OPINION

[In particular if you are an author/performer:] What is the best
mechanism (or combination of mechanisms) to ensure that you
receive an adequate remuneration fortheexploitation of your
works and performances?

NO OPINION

Is there a need to act at theEUlevel (for instance to prohibit
certain clauses in contracts)?

□YES-Please explain□NO-Please explain why

NO OPTNTON

If you consider that the current rules are not effective, what
would you suggest to address the shortcomings you identify?

NO OPINION

Should the civil enforcement system in theEUbe rendered more
efficient for infringements of copyright committed with a
commercial purpose?

□YES-Please explain

□NO-Please explain

□NO OPINION

In particular, isthecurrent legal framework clear enough to
allow for sufficient involvement of intermediaries (such as
Internet service providers, advertising brokers, payment
service providers, domain name registrars, etc.) in inhibiting
online copyright infringements with a commercial purpose? If
not, what measures would be useful to foster the cooperation of
intermediaries?

NO OPINION

Does thecurrent civil enforcement framework ensure that the
right balance is achieved between the right to have one's
copyright respected and other rights such as the protection
ofprivate life and protection ofpersonal data?

□YES-Please explain

□NO-Please explain

□NO OPINION

Should theEUpursue the establishment of a singleEUCopyright
Title, as a means of establishing a consistent framework for
rights and exceptions to copyright across theEU,as well as a
single framework for enforcement?

□YES

□NO

□NO OPINION

Should this be the next stepin the development of copyright in
theEU?Does the current level of difference among the Member
State legislation mean that this is a longer term project?

EenEU-auteursrechtkan snel worden gerealiseerd. Hiervoor kan
hetEuropeanCopyright Code van hetWittemproject als basis dienen

Are there any otherimportantmatters related to theEUlegal
framework for copyright? Please explain and indicate how such
matters should be addressed.

NO OPINION

