


                      EC Consultation Detailed Response

1. [In particular if you are an end user/consumer:] Have you faced problems
when trying to access online services in an EU Member State other than the
one in which you live?
YES - Please provide examples indicating the Member State, the sector and
the type of content concerned (e.g. premium content such as certain films
and TV series, audio-visual content in general, music, e-books, magazines,
journals and newspapers, games, applications and other software)

Yes. Music services in member states are often territorially blocked on
either rights or provider grounds.

4. If you have identified problems in the answers to any of the questions
above – what would be the best way to tackle them?
[Open question]

Access to online services should be equivalent from any point in the EU.
The EU should be treated as one single market

5. [In particular if you are a right holder or a collective management
organisation:] Are there reasons why, even in cases where you hold all the
necessary rights for all the territories in question, you would still find
it necessary or justified to impose territorial restrictions on a service
provider (in order, for instance, to ensure that access to certain content
is not possible in certain European countries)?

Content should be accessible from anywhere in the EU once it is available
in one state. There should be no restrictions on this. Marketing can
differentiate between states and be carried out at different times but
availability should be universal.

7. Do you think that further measures (legislative or non-legislative,
including market-led solutions) are needed at EU level to increase the
cross-border availability of content services in the Single Market, while
ensuring an adequate level of protection for right holders?

Yes. Blocking of access from one state to another should be illegal. The
Single market should prevail.

9. Could a clarification of the territorial scope of the “making available”
right have an effect on the recognition of your rights (e.g. whether you
are considered to be an author or not, whether you are considered to have
transferred your rights or not), on your remuneration, or on the
enforcement of rights (including the availability of injunctive relief24)?

Yes. The Making Available right has failed performers in the UK and many
other EU states as producers have taken the view that the right is swept up
in their recording agreements. We believe that to ensure that the right
delivers real benefits to performers it should in part be a non-assignable
equitable remuneration right. There already exists precedent for this in
Spain, where performers are entitled to a payment of equitable remuneration
whenever their works are made available on demand.








10. [In particular if you a service provider or a right holder:] Does the
application of two rights to a single act of economic exploitation in the
online environment (e.g. a download) create problems for you?

Yes. Licensing of copyright in the digital age has become over complex and
expensive to obtain. Rights users should be able to license all the rights
they need in one transaction for use in all EU member states. The division
of that income should be the responsibility of collective organisations on
a standardised basis. A musical stream should have the same rights
composition throughout the EU not one that varies between each state. The
result would be more competition as services could launch without paying
enormous access charges for a necessary body of content and one rights
holder could not stop a service launching. Consumers would benefit with
better and total access to creators work.

11. Should the provision of a hyperlink leading to a work or other subject
matter protected under copyright, either in general or under specific
circumstances, be subject to the authorisation of the rightholder?

No. The act of linking with minimal quotation from the copyrighted material
should not be subject to authorisation.

14. [In particular if you are a right holder or a service provider:] What
would be the consequences of providing a legal framework enabling the
resale of previously purchased digital content? Please specify per market
(type of content) concerned.

The market for the sale of music downloads would be destroyed if the resale
of previous purchased tracks was allowed. Digital files that can be copied
an infinite amount of times without any degradation need different laws to
physical copies. Consumer should be educated about copyright and it should
be made clearer that a consumer purchasing a music download is in fact
purchasing a license to access it rather than a physical copy that can be
passed on.

15. Would the creation of a registration system at EU level help in the
identification and licensing of works and other subject matter?

The creation of a registration system at EU level would not help in the
licensing of works in the music sector. The enormous change wrought in the
last 15 years with the advent of digital and the internet have produced
enormous complication and a vast outpouring of new creativity. Creators who
wish to monetise their work need to use the current registries that exist
for that purpose but the organisations that run registries must ensure that
their systems work, are transparent and are fair to all parties. The CRM
process will hopefully deliver that.

The role of the EU should be to encourage those processes and to step in if
necessary to promote change.

19. What should be the role of the EU in promoting the adoption of
identifiers in the content sector, and in promoting the development and
interoperability of rights ownership and permissions databases?

There should be a carrot and stick approach to ensure that all
rightsholders work together. If necessary financial penalties should be
imposed upon rights holders who fail to carry out their responsibilities.






20. Are the current terms of copyright protection still appropriate in the
digital environment?

The current terms of copyright protection are still appropriate except for
audio visual material which should be extended to 70 years from creation.

22. Should some/all of the exceptions be made mandatory and, if so, is
there a need for a higher level of harmonisation of such exceptions?

Exceptions should be mandatory and harmonised. The EU should be viewed as a
single market for exceptions. Compensation should be harmonised and uniform
across the EU.

A.B.C.D.E. 28-57

These issues should be dealt with on an EU basis with rules, regulations
and payments harmonised.

58. (c) [In particular if you are a right holder:] Have you experienced
problems resulting from the way the users are using pre-existing works or
other subject-matter to disseminate new content on the Internet, including
across borders?

User Generated Content is to be lauded but users need to respect the moral
and commercial rights of creators of original material. Once generated,
content knows no borders.

59. (a) [In particular if you are an end user/consumer or a right holder:]
Have you experienced problems when trying to ensure that the work you have
created (on the basis of pre-existing works) is properly identified for
online use? Are proprietary systems sufficient in this context?

Proprietary systems are beginning to develop in identifying online use.
Users who create content know what they have used but they would need
access to rights databases to ensure accurate identification of one version
of a musical work as opposed to another. In general UGC that has limited
take-up does not need 100% accurate identification but successful content
does. Technological advances should eventually ensure that identification
happens.

60. (a) [In particular if you are an end user/consumer or a right holder):]
Have you experienced problems when trying to be remunerated for the use of
the work you have created (on the basis of pre-existing works)?

Once identification of successful UGC occurs remuneration should follow but
should be carried out in transparent manner with pre-ordained income splits
which means collective licensing.

61. If there are problems, how would they best be solved?

Better identification systems are needed on a cost –effective basis. Low-
level usage could be dealt with by flat fee payments administered on a
collective EU wide (and worldwide?) basis.

64. In your view, is there a need to clarify at the EU level the scope and
application of the private copying and reprography exceptions58 in the
digital environment?

The scope and application of private copying and reprographic exceptions
should be harmonised across the EU. Payments should be uniform and dealt
with transparently by collecting societies with fair distribution rules.





66. How would changes in levies with respect to the application to online
services (e.g. services based on cloud computing allowing, for instance,
users to have copies on different devices) impact the development and
functioning of new business models on the one hand and rightholders’
revenue on the other?

Any service that derives income from copying copyrighted material should
pay levies.

67. Would you see an added value in making levies visible on the invoices
for products subject to levies?

Yes. It would help consumer education.

72. [In particular if you are an author/performer:] What is the best
mechanism (or combination of mechanisms) to ensure that you receive an
adequate remuneration for the exploitation of your works and performances?

Creators remuneration has suffered in the digital age due to rights owners
imposing analogue deal structures on to digital revenues i.e. using sales
royalty rates for streaming. Digital business is different with radically
different costs. Amongst the changes that could be made are:

   1. Copyright transfers to be licensed only for a maximum of 35 years.

   2. Creators must be allowed inside commercially sensitive non-disclosure
      agreements that feature their works.

   3. Any income stream should be able to be audited anywhere in the world.

   4. Licensed or assigned rights should be subject to fair Use It Or Lose
      It provisions throughout term of copyright.

   5. Creators should share in all income streams that feature their work.

73. Is there a need to act at the EU level (for instance to prohibit
certain clauses in contracts)?

Points 1,2,3,4 in answer to Q.72 could be made European law that would
override contracts.

74. If you consider that the current rules are not effective, what would
you suggest to address the shortcomings you identify?

Adoption of law suggested in answer to Q.73

75. Should the civil enforcement system in the EU be rendered more
efficient for infringements of copyright committed with a commercial
purpose?

Yes. There is a huge difference between a consumer sharing one music file
and industrial scale deliberate infringement.










76. In particular, is the current legal framework clear enough to allow for
sufficient involvement of intermediaries (such as Internet service
providers, advertising brokers, payment service providers, domain name
registrars, etc.) in inhibiting online copyright infringements with a
commercial purpose? If not, what measures would be useful to foster the
cooperation of intermediaries?

We are in a period of massive change and intermediaries (some of who have
barely existed for a decade) as well as legacy companies (including rights
holders) have to adapt to the new environment. Positions are constantly
evolving and the legal framework cannot keep up. As soon as one law is
enacted it can be out of date. And the lines between a legal site and an
illegal one are blurred. All parties need to accept this. The role of the
EC should be foster debate and action that enables all parties to be
transparently and fairly rewarded commensurate to their efforts.

78. Should the EU pursue the establishment of a single EU Copyright Title,
as a means of establishing a consistent framework for rights and exceptions
to copyright across the EU, as well as a single framework for enforcement?

Yes

79. Should this be the next step in the development of copyright in the EU?
Does the current level of difference among the Member State legislation
mean that this is a longer term project?

Yes but it is a long term option.






MMF/FAC
Unit 41 Tileyard Studios
Tileyard Road
London
N7 9AH
+44 (20) 77005755
webbo@themmf.net; fiona@thefac.org

-----------------------
    Music Managers Forum / Featured Artists Coalition / Unit 41, Tileyard
                    Studios, Tileyard Road, London N7 9AH
           Contact: Jon Webster / 0207 700 5755 / webbo@themmf.net
                       www.themmf.net / www.thefac.org





