


Public Consultation

on the review of the EU copyright rules

Please identify yourself:

Name:

Hilde Keteleer,

Type of respondent(Pleaseunderlinethe appropriate):

X Author/Performer

Other(Please explain):

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

II.Rights and the functioning of the Single Market

A.Why is it not possible to accessmany online content
servicesfrom anywhere in Europe?

1.[In particular if you are an end user/consumer:]Have you faced
problems whentryingto access online services in an EU Member
State other than the one in which you live?

YES - Please provide examples indicating the Member State,
the sector and the type of content concerned (e.g. premium
content such as certain films and TV series, audio-visual
content in general, music, e-books, magazines, journals and
newspapers, games, applications and other software)

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO

NO OPINION

3.[In particular if you area right holder or acollective
management organisation:]Howoftenare youaskedtogrant
multi-territorial licences?Pleaseindicate, if possible, the
number of requests per yearand provide examples indicating the
Member State, the sector and the type of content concerned.

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

5.[In particular if you area right holder or acollective
management organisation:]Are there reasons why, even in cases
where you hold all the necessary rights for all the territories
in question, you would still find it necessary or justified to
impose territorial restrictions on a service provider (in
order, for instance, to ensure that access to certain content
is not possible in certain European countries)?

X YES– Please explain by giving examples

There are objective reasons for territorial licensing. First and
foremost, this is the most efficient way to respond to local
demand which tends towards national content first and non-EU
and/or non-national content second, with language playing a
significant role. Second, market and regulatory conditions vary
from country to country, de-facto imposing territorial licensing
in certain circumstances. In addition, European audiovisual
content is predominantly financed, produced and disseminated in
models of joint ventures (co-productions) and/or risk-sharing
between partners from different distribution platforms and/or
territories.

NO

NO OPINION

7. Do you think that further measures (legislative or
non-legislative, including market-led solutions) are needed at
EU level to increase the cross-border availability of content
services in the Single Market, while ensuring an adequate level
ofprotection for right holders?

YES – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

X NO– Please explain

In the text and image sector, current legislation is of no
hindrance to the development of multi-territorial solutions.
This is also confirmed in documents from the European
Commission (EC)1. Commercial users can generally ask for
permission to use a work directly from the publisher or author
and obtain it on a contractual and up to worldwide basis.
Equally, Reproduction Rights organisations (hereinafter ‘RROs’)
are used to administering rights for secondary uses across
borders on the basis of different legislation and models of RRO
operation. Rights for foreign authors and publishers are
generally administered through the network of bilateral
agreements between RROs. The IFRRO-recommended Repertoire
Exchange Mandate (REM) for digital licensing by RROs2does not
impose any territorial limitations.

As noted by the EU Advocate General Eleanor Sharpston in her
Opinion (case C-351/12)3, typically in the EU, CMOs operate
(whether by virtue of a statutory or de facto monopoly) within
the territory of a single Member State and may be required to
accept as members any rightholder resident or established
within that State. In such cases, they monitor and grant
licenses to users within the same Member State. A user may
obtain a license for a repertoire managed by a CMO established
in another Member State by means of reciprocal arrangements
between CMOs, each of them acting on behalf of the other(s)
within its own territory4. The principle of copyright
territoriality has also been reconfirmed in the Court of
Justice of the European Union’s (CJEU’s) “Premier League”
case (C-403/08)5.

1 - For instance, the Reflection Document on “Creative Content
in a European Digital Single Market: Challenges for the
Future”, 22 October 2009, page 12, second paragraph, lines
5-7, states that: “the present legal framework does not in
itself prevent right holders from commercialising their works
on a multi-territory basis”.

2 - http://www.ifrro.org/node/1114

3-http://curia.europa.eu/juris/document/document.jsf?text=&docid=144496&pageIndex=0&doclang=EN&mode=lst&dir=&occ=first&part=1&cid=399913

4 - Supra, para. 72.

5 -
http://curia.europa.eu/juris/liste.jsf?language=en&num=C-403/08

NO OPINION

B.Is there a need for more clarity as regards the scope of what
needs to be authorised (or not) in digital transmissions?

8. Isthe scope of the“making available”right in cross-border
situations – i.e. when content is disseminated across borders
–sufficiently clear?

X YES

NO–Pleaseexplain how this could be clarified and what
typeofclarification would be required(e.g.as in "targeting"
approach explained above,as in "country of origin"approach1

The objective of implementing a “country of origin”approachis to
localise the copyright relevant act that must be licenced in a
single Member State (the "country of origin", which could be
for example the Member State in whichthe content is uploaded or
wherethe service provider is established), regardless of in how
many Member States the work canbe accessed or received. Such an
approachhas already been introduced at EU level with regard to
broadcasting by satellite(seeDirective 93/83/EEC on the
coordination of certain rules concerning copyright and rights
related to copyright applicable to satellite broadcasting and
cable retransmission).

)

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO OPINION

9.[In particular if you are a right holder:]Could
a clarification of the territorial scope of the “making
available” right have an effect on the recognition of your
rights (e.g. whether you are considered to be an author or not,
whether you are considered to have transferred your rights or
not),onyour remuneration, oron the enforcement of rights
(including the availability of injunctive relief2

Injunctive relief is a temporary or permanent remedy allowing
the right holder to stop or prevent an infringement of his/her
right.

)?

YES – Please explain howsuchpotential effectscould
beaddressed

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

X NO

NO OPINION

2. Two rights involved in a single act of exploitation

10.[In particular if youa service provider or a right
holder:]Does the application of two rights to a single act of
economic exploitation in the online environment (e.g. a
download) create problems for you?

YES – Please explainwhat type of measureswould be needed in
order to address such problems (e.g. facilitation of joint
licences when the rights are in different hands,legislation to
achieve the "bundling of rights")

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

X NO

NO OPINION

3.
--

Linking and browsing

11.Should the provision of a hyperlink leading to a work or
other subject matter protected under copyright,either in
generalor under specific circumstances,besubject to the
authorisation of the rightholder?

X YES– Please explain whether you consider this to be the
case in general, or under specific circumstances, and why

Hyperlinks are essential tools for online content delivery and
form a part of the communication process. Specifically, where a
hyperlink is comprised of or includes text protected as the
whole or part of a copyright work (see The Newspaper Licensing
Agency Ltd & Ors v Meltwater Holding BV & Ors [2011] EWCA Civ
890), the ‘provision’ of a hyperlink would involve the making
available of the whole or part of a copyright work. In such
circumstances, the authorisation of the right holder would be
appropriate. This is especially relevant to the provision of
paid-for services to business users, which would otherwise
substitute for services which currently generate important
income streams for content owners.

We understand the purpose of the question as being that of
providing relevant user access to copyright works. There are
licensing mechanisms in place to enable legal user access, so
there is no reason to exempt the act of hyperlinking to a
copyright work or other subject matter from the requirement of
right holder authorisation. This view was also held by the
District Court of The Hague when it ruled in the case of
Buma/Stemra against the operator of radio streaming websites
‘Nederland.fm’ and ‘Op.fm’, that a website, which is
embedding or linking to radio-streams without a license,
infringes copyright8. Nevertheless, not all linking should
necessarily be made subject to authorisation. There might be an
implied license to linkin a loyal manner to other websites, as
long as the material that is being linked to has been made
available with the consent of the copyright holder.

8 In English:
https://www.bumastemra.nl/wp-content/uploads/2012-12-19-judgment-Buma-Stemra-Souren-Eng.pdf

 NO – Please explainwhether you consider this to be the case
in general,or under specific circumstances, and why(e.g.
because it does not amount to an act of communication to the
public – or to a new public, or because it should be covered by
a copyright exception)

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO OPINION

12.Should the viewing of a web-page where this
impliesthetemporary reproduction of a work or other subject
matter protected under copyrighton the screen and in thecache
memory of the user’s computer,either in general or under
specific circumstances, be subject to the authorisation of the
rightholder?

X YES– Please explain whether you consider this to be the
case in general, or under specific circumstances, and why

Reproductions that are both temporary and incidental to an
authorised act should not require additional consent from the
copyright holder. This does not mean that all “cache” memory
copies are to be considered “temporary” or strictly
“incidental” ones. The facts of the case need to be
analysed and that is best left to the courts.

Technological development has had the effect that copyright
content is increasingly viewed or listened to (“streamed”)
through computer browsers rather than by the making of
downloaded copies. The increasing use of streaming is
documented, for example, in a report prepared for Ofcom9, which
tracked digital behaviours and attitudes among persons aged 12+,
in the United Kingdom. The report noted that the incidence of
streaming of TV programmes was much more common than
downloading (33% for streaming, compared to 9% for
downloading). Streaming services are one variety of “on-demand”
service, which is specifically referred to in Recital 10 to
Directive 2001/29/EC as requiring protection.

It would not be compatible with common sense of justice that
essentially the same act – making a copy of the monitoring
report for the purpose of reading its content – should not
require a license in one case (when accessed online), while it
does in the other (when accessed by e-mail). If viewing and
streaming were not subject to right holder authorisation, this
anomaly would exist in the online environment generally, where
the problem of piracy is notorious.

Accessing the same content by the easy alternative of visiting
the website of an unlicensed website (claiming to avoid the
payment of a license fee) obviously conflicts with the normal
exploitation of the works and unreasonably prejudices the
legitimate interests of the copyright holders, thereby
infringing the three-step test in international conventions
that the EU Member States are party to, as well as Article 5(5)
of European Union Copyright Directive (EUCD). The computer user
deliberately creates a copy of the work on his computer screen.
It is his very purpose in opening his browser and going to a
webpage for a book or article, and/or streaming a sound
recording or film. The end user must therefore be obliged to
obtain alicense to access the underlying work. This does not
prevent a user from reading, viewing or listening to content
that has been made legally available on the web with the
consent of the copyright holder. Any further use is, however,
subject to authorisation or licensing.

9 - See:
http://stakeholders.ofcom.org.uk/binaries/research/telecoms-research/online-copyright/deep-dive.pdf

 NO – Please explainwhether you consider this to be the case
in general,or under specific circumstances, andwhy(e.g. because
it isor should be covered by a copyright exception)

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO OPINION

4.
--

Download to own digital content

14.[In particular if you area right holder or a service
provider:] What would bethe consequencesof providing a legal
framework enabling the resale of previously purchased digital
content? Please specify per market (type of content) concerned.

[Open question]

The creation of a legal framework enabling the resale of
previously purchased digital content would have many negative
business effects. If users were to be allowed to sell e-books
or articles of the same quality as the initial copy, and
without wear and tear, it could eventually lead to the
destruction of (parts of) the primary market. This risks, in
turn, impacting negatively on the EU’s foreign relations, given
that EU publishers would be less interested in making low-cost
digital content available in countries that cannot afford to
pay the full EU price.

From the perspective of right holders, by confirming the
possibility for sole owners of a digital copy to invoke
successfully the exhaustion doctrine, this might incentivize
the drafting of relevant terms and conditions as mere rights of
use, rather than transfers of ownership. Licenses, purporting to
grant rights of use without conveying ownership, would likely
become more prevalent.

Large scale digital retailers, Apple and Amazon, have both
obtained patents for systems of resale for digital items10,
which indicates that these retailers may be thinking about
setting up their own marketplace or lending library for the
transfer of user-owned digital content. Unless these
marketplaces allow original content creators to benefit from
the resale of their goods, reduced earnings prospects could
seriously reduce the creators’ incentive to create.

The ownership of digital files and the possibility of their
resale are linked to the application of the principle of
exhaustion to the distribution of tangible copies of works. The
answer provided by CJEU’s case law in the Oracle vs. UsedSoft
decision, Case C-128/1111, is limited only to the specific case
of software.

According to the German Regional Court of Bielefeld, the CJEU’s
UsedSoft decision is not applicable to the resale of other
digital content12. More specifically, the German court held
that, because of the nature of the Software Directive
2009/24/EC as lex specialis to Directive 2001/29/EC, the
reasoning in UsedSoft could not be applied to other
subject-matter. In this vein, the Landgericht Bielefeld
concluded that the EUCD does not permit the application of the
principle of exhaustion to works in non-analogue form.

10 -See:
http://mashable.com/2013/03/08/apple-amazon-used-goods-marketplaces/

11 -http://curia.europa.eu/juris/documents.jsf?num=C-128/11

12 -Case No 4 O 191/11, Landgericht (German Regional Court)
Bielefeld, 5 March 2013 , available (in German) here:
http://www.ifrro.org/sites/default/files/lg_bielefeld_vom_05.03.13_klage_verbraucherzentralen.pdf

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

C.
==

Registration of works and other subject matter – is it a good
idea?

15. Would the creation of a registration system at EU level help
in the identification and licensing of works and other subject
matter?

YES

X NO

 NO OPINION

16. What would be the possible advantages of such a system?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

17. What would be the possible disadvantages of such a system?

[Open question]

Under current international copyright legislation, registration
cannot be made compulsory or constitute a precondition for the
protection and exercise of rights. A registry could be
established on a voluntary basis. The possible advantages of
registration, provided it is established on a voluntary basis,
include the identification and proof of rights and the
facilitation of copyright licensing. However, authors and
publishers cannot be required or expected to monitor
notifications in the EU and its Member States. Also, in the
print sector, there are already identifiers being used to
identify the text, the publication and the author and
publisher, in the form of the ISO standard identifiers ISBN,
ISSN, ISTC, ISNI and DOI

18. What incentives forregistrationbyrightholderscould be
envisaged?

[Open question]

Incentives linked to protection and/or enforcement of rights
will not be compatible with international copyright norms.

D. How to improve the use and interoperability of identifiers
=============================================================

19. What should be the role of the EU in promoting the adoption
of identifiers in the content sector, and in promoting the
development and interoperability of rights ownership and
permissions databases?

[Open question]

Identifiers are crucial for the efficiency and transparency of
CMO operations. EC-sponsored projects such as ARROW and ARROW
Plus include references to the desirability of using
international identifier standards such as ISNI (International
Standard Name Identifier, ISO 27729) and ISTC (International
Standard text Code, ISO 21047). This could be facilitated by
the transposition of ISO 21047 and ISO 27729 into European
standards.

EC support could also be given for projects to populate vital
databases being used by EU Projects with agreed international
standards. In particular the TEL (The European Library)
database, used also for the ARROW project, could be funded to
acquire ISNIs and ISTCs, for the free use also by other
databases, such as those of CMOs and Books in Print. There is a
need for CMOs to be able to use such standards to optimise their
distribution activities, as required under the EU CRM Directive.
A feasibility study is desirable to see how the international
standards ISNI and ISTC can be interfaced with the private
databases of the CMOs, for instance, in the text and data
field, so that distribution of revenue can be better automated.
Such a study could be financed, totally or partially, by the
European Commission.

Two main identifier systems are currently used in the
audiovisual sector: the ISO-labelled International Standard
Audiovisual Number (ISAN – www.isan.org) and the Entertainment
Identifier Registry (EIDR –www.eidr.org).

E. Term of protection – is it appropriate?

20. Are the current terms of copyright protection still
appropriate in the digital environment?

X YES– Please explain

Whether the environment is digital or analogue is irrelevant to
the question of term of protection. I see no need for a change
of the term of copyright at this stage.

The main reason for establishing a term of protection of the
life of the author plus 70 years was the extension of the
average lifespan in Europe. As an author, I hope that the
revenues from my earlier works will help me continue working
and, later in life, enable me to live a dignified retirement. I
also think it is justified that my children and grand-children
inherit my copyright so that they can take care of my works and
my moral rights.

NO – Please explain if they should be longer or shorter

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO OPINION

III.Limitations and exceptions in the Single Market

21. Are there problems arising from the fact that most
limitations and exceptions provided in the EUcopyright
directivesare optionalfor the Member States?

YES – Please explain by referring to specific cases

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

X NO– Please explain

The European Union model is based on the various legal and other
models and traditions of its Member States. They vary
substantially and encompass those of civil and common law
countries. This poses challenges to the European Union but it
also represents its strength.

There is no problem with the fact that most exceptions provided
in the EU Copyright Directive are optional for European
countries. The list of exceptions is very long and encompasses
all possible exceptions in the EU, but not for direct
implementation by all countries. Making this list mandatory
would severely undermine the protection of authors’
rights.……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO OPINION

22. Should some/all of the exceptions be made mandatory and, if
so, is there aneed for a higher level of harmonisation of such
exceptions?

YES–Please explain byreferringto specific cases

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

X NO– Please explain

In accordance with our response to Question 21, we do not see
any particular issue with the optionality of exceptions and
limitations in the EU Directives. There does not seem to be a
need for existing exceptions to be made mandatory. Flexibility
is important to ensure that thecopyright framework matches the
needs of the individual Member State. Those needs may vary from
one Member State to the other.

There is no general need for a higher level of harmonisation of
the list of exceptions and limitations of the Copyright
Directive. The fact that the list is closed and cannot be added
to already provides for a certain harmonisation.

Only the private copying exception which is accompanied by fair
compensation should be further harmonized so that all European
countries would have a private copying exception, which is
beneficial to consumers, and levy systems to compensate
creators (see answer to Q. 64 and subsequent on private
copying.

 NO OPINION

23. Should any new limitations and exceptions be added to or
removed from the existing catalogue?Please explain by referring
to specific cases.

[Open question]

There is no need for any additional exceptions to the existing
long list of exceptions of the Copyright Directive.

Rather than considering whether to remove or add to the current
exceptions and limitations focus should be on the
implementation of the existing ones and stakeholder solutions
developed on the basis of them. Examples of such
stakeholder-driven solutions, which still need to be fully
implemented, are the ARROW13system to facilitate rights
information management, the Memorandum of Understanding (MoU)
on Key Principles on the Digitisation and Making Available of
Out-of-Commerce Works14, and the EU Stakeholders Dialogue
Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) on access to works by people
with print disabilities15. Also, we see a need for the EU to
adopt an overarching policy on Intellectual Property (IP).

13 - See : http://www.arrow-net.eu/

14 - See :
http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/copyright/out-of-commerce/index_en.htm

15 -
http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/copyright/docs/copyright-infso/2010/20100914_mou_en.pdf

24. Independently from the questions above, is there a need to
provide for a greater degree of flexibility in the EU
regulatory framework for limitations and exceptions?

 YES – Please explain why

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

X NO– Please explain why

The optionality of exceptions and limitations in the EUCD
provides for a sufficient degree of flexibility.

It is not clear what the questionnaire means by flexibility. The
fact that the exceptions and limitations in the closed-list of
the Copyright Directive are optional provides a sufficient
degree of flexibility: European countries can choose to
implement the exceptions or not. Further flexibility in this
area such as the possibility to add exceptions that are not
part of the Directive would lead to ambiguity and less
certainty for people as to what they can and can’t do.

I am particularly concerned with the proposal to introduce a US
style “fair use” provision in the EU since it is absolutely not
adapted to our legal traditions. It would also add legal
uncertainty as to what users can do with my works as fair use
issues can only be resolved in the Courts. As an author, I
don’t want to have to go to Court each time I consider that
my work has been illegitimately used without my permission. I
prefer having clear exceptions described in the law.

 NO OPINION

26. Does the territoriality of limitations and exceptions, in
your experience, constitute a problem?

 YES – Please explain why and specify which exceptions you
are referring to

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO – Please explain why and specify which exceptions you are
referring to

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO OPINION

27. In the event that limitations and exceptions established at
national level were to have cross-border effect, how should the
question of “fair compensation” be addressed, when such
compensation is part of the exception? (e.g. who pays whom,
where?)

[Open question]

Based on international norms and EU law, such uses would be
subject to compensation by the user in the country of where the
use takes place.

A. Access to content in libraries and archives1. Preservation
and archiving

28. (b)[In particular if you are a right holder:]Have you
experienced problems with the use by libraries, educational
establishments, museum or archives of the preservation
exception?

 YES – Please explain, by Member State, sector, and the type
of use in question.

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

X NO

 NO OPINION

2. Off-premises access to library collections

32. (c)[In particular if you are aright holder:]Have you
negotiated agreements with institutional users that enable
those institutions to provide remote access, including across
borders, to the works or other subject-matter in their
collections, for purposes of research and private study?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

3. E – lending

36. (c)[In particular if you are aright holder:]Have you
negotiated agreements with libraries to enable them to lend
books or other materials electronically, including across
borders?

 YES – Please explain with specific examples

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO

 NO OPINION

37. If there are problems, how would they best be solved?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

The following two questions are relevant both to this point (n°
3) and the previous one (n° 2).

38.[In particular if you are an institutional user:]What
differences do you see in the management of physical and online
collections, including providing access to your subscribers?
What problems have you encountered?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

39.[In particular if you are a right holder:]What difference do
you see between libraries’ traditional activities such as
on-premises consultation or public lending and activities such
as off-premises (online, at a distance) consultation and
e-lending? What problems have you encountered?

[Open question]

Libraries remain, also in the digital world, important
institutions for readers. There is a difference between genres
of publishing, especially between academic and trade, where the
former business model is about licensing 99% of the content to
academic libraries, and the second, of which libraries
represent at best 5% of its revenues, which means that in most
countries 99% of the publishers’ revenues are sales through
bookshops. As selling access to copyright works, rather than
physical copies, is an essential part of the business model in
the digital environment, in particular in trade-book
publishing, library e-lending will more easily conflict with
the normal exploitation of the work and unreasonably prejudice
the legitimate interest of the right holder. Also, it may no
longer be seen to represent a special case, and thus easily
conflict with all three criteria of the three-step test in
international conventions that EU Member States are party to.

E-lending from libraries can, and should, nonetheless, take
place, on the basis of con¬tractual arrangements with copyright
holders or their representatives. Arrangements already exist in
several EU Member States. Various models are being explored,
and the main chal¬lenge now is to identify and communicate best
practices on the range of models that best serve the assortment
of purposes.

One should also note that the e-book market is only at a nascent
stage (with 15% in the UK, but between 2 and 3% in Germany,
France, Italy, Scandinavia and Spain and less than 1%
everywhere else), and that sales to consumers represent the
majority of the trade-book market.

4. Mass digitisation

40.[In particular if you are an institutional user,engaging or
wanting to engage in mass digitisation projects, a right
holder, a collective management organisation:]Would it be
necessary in your country to enact legislation to ensure that
the results of the 2011 MoU (i.e. the agreements concluded
between libraries and collecting societies) have a cross-border
effect so that out of commerce works can be accessed across the
EU?

 YES – Please explain why and how it could best be achieved

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO – Please explain

X NO OPINION

Some EU Member States have already incorporated legislation to
enable large scale digitisation and making available of
cultural heritage through licensing. Whether EU or national
legislation is required depends on and can only be answered
when the EC has made known its proposed solution for
cross-border accessibility.

Principle 3 of the MoU ensures that, in case the scope of a
voluntary agreement includes cross-border and/or commercial
uses, the CMO may limit its license of works that are
out-of-commerce to those of represented right holders. Also, a
specific procedure should be considered in order to reach the
right holders who are presumed to be represented and whose
works are used frequently or intensively. Subject to this, the
legal presumption should also apply to acts of use of the work
covered by the licence which occur in a Member State which is
not the Member State in which the license was agreed.

The signatories to the EC-facilitated MoU on Key principles on
the digitisation and making available of out-of-commerce works
agreed to call “on the European Commission, to the extent
required to ensure legal certainty in a cross-border context,
to consider the type of legislation to be enacted to ensure
that publicly accessible cultural institutions and collective
management organisations which enter into a license in good
faith applying these key principles are legally protected with
regard to licensed uses of works of right holders who have been
presumed to be within the scope of the license.”

41. Would it be necessary to develop mechanisms, beyond those
already agreed for other types of content (e.g. for audio- or
audio-visual collections, broadcasters’ archives)?

 YES – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO OPINION

B. Teaching
===========

42. (b)[In particular if you are a right holder:]Have you
experienced specific problems resulting from the way in which
works or other subject-matter are used for illustration for
teaching, including across borders?

 YES – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

X NO

 NO OPINION

44. What mechanisms exist in the market place to facilitate the
use of content for illustration for teaching purposes? How
successful are they?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

C. Research

47. (b)[In particular if you are a right holder:]Have you
experienced specific problems resulting from the way in which
works or other subject-matter are used in the context of
research projects/activities, including across borders?

 YES – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

X NO

 NO OPINION

49. What mechanisms exist in the Member States to facilitate the
use of content for research purposes? How successful are they?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

D. Disabilities
===============

50.

(c)[In particular if you are a right holder:]Have you
experienced specific problems resulting from the application of
limitations or exceptions allowing for the
distribution/communication of works published in special
formats, including across borders?

 YES – Please explain by giving examples

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

X NO

 NO OPINION

52. What mechanisms exist in the market place to facilitate
accessibility to content? How successful are they?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

E. Text and data mining

53(c)[In particular if you are a right holder:]Have you
experienced specific problems resulting from the use of text
and data mining in relation to copyright protected content,
including across borders?

 YES – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

X NO– Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO OPINION

55. If your view is that a legislative solution is needed, what
would be its main elements? Which activities should be covered
and under what conditions?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

57. Are there other issues, unrelated to copyright, that
constitute barriers to the use of text or data mining methods?

[Open question] ……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

F. User-generated content

58 (c)[In particular if you are a right holder:]Have you
experienced problems resulting from the way the users are using
pre-existing works or other subject-matter to disseminate new
content on the Internet, including across borders?

 YES – Please explain by giving examples

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

X NO

 NO OPINION

59. (a)[In particular if you are an end user/consumer or a right
holder:]Have you experienced problems when trying to ensure that
the work you have created (on the basis of pre-existing works)
is properly identified for online use? Are proprietary systems
sufficient in this context?

X YES– Please explain

I do not oppose user-generated content (UGC) in principle. I am
(like most authors) very familiar with creative processes which
use pre-existing works, in particular in the audiovisual sector
where films very often use recorded music and documentaries are
sometimes made of extracts of older works.

What is striking is the claim of some to be able to create UGC
without seeking the permission of the authors of the
pre-existing works, but to ask for recognition of their rights
on the new works! This is unacceptable. UGC needs the
authorisation of the authors or their representatives, in
particular to guarantee respect for moral rights.

 NO – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO OPINION

61. If there are problems, how would they best be solved?

[Open question]

In my view, the solution to UGC lies in licensing schemes
concluded between right holders’ representatives such as
audiovisual authors’ collective management organisations (CMOs)
and the social media platforms as well as micro-licenses for
small users. In fact, many examples of licensing schemes are
already being developed (e.g. in the music sector). These
should be encouraged and promoted so that platforms who make
money through UGC share their benefits with creators.

These licensing mechanisms should be devised to ensure that very
personal uses would cost virtually nothing in terms of licensing
fees. The cost of licenses generally should be proportionate to
the use made of the works. Internet platforms should not be the
main beneficiaries of the success of UGC. Licenses with the
platforms as well as the individuals themselves should be
sought.

IV. Private copying and reprography

64. In your view, is there a need to clarify at the EU level the
scope and application of the private copying and reprography
exceptions3

Art. 5.2(a) and 5.2(b) of Directive 2001/29/EC.

in the digital environment?

 YES – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

X NO– Please explain

There is no need to change Articles 5.2 (a) and 5.2 (b) of the
EUCD. In particular, it must continue to be a requirement that
certain exceptions are only permissible if fair compensation is
provided to the right holders.

There is, however, a need for clarification that the amount of
private copying compensation should be linked to the value of
the creative works being copied, not to the price of the
devices which can depend on commercial strategies.

 NO OPINION

65. Should digital copies made by end users for private purposes
in the context of a service that has been licensed by
rightholders, and where the harm to the rightholder is minimal,
be subject to private copying levies?4

This issue was also addressed in the recommendations of Mr
Antonio Vitorino resulting from the mediation on private
copying and reprography levies

X YES– Please explain

This proposal is simply a way to get rid of the levy systems
that organise the fair compensation to authors through levies
on products and devices that allow private copies to be made
and stocked.

If the private copying exception was questioned and private
copies inserted into licenses as proposed, those that would
suffer most from such a change would be consumers and authors.
The consumers would lose their freedom to copy and authors
their fair compensation.

Most of the time, services which have an authorization to
exploit works negotiate their authorisation, license fee and
commercial terms with the right holder in charge of the
exploitation of the work. In the countries where an exception
to private copying exists, private copies cannot be part of the
deal and the fair compensation is collected through the
levysystem and distributed to right holders by their CMOs. This
a fair system that ensures that all right holders benefit from
such a remuneration.

The collectively managed fair compensation protects creators
from any unfair deal. In practice, only few right holders grant
licenses to digital services (the producers or further
intermediaries). Other right holders, such as screenwriters or
directors who transferred their reproduction right to the
producer (sometimes for a lump-sum payment) do not have any
direct relation with digital services and therefore, cannot be
paid directly and individually.

A huge advantage of the private copying system is that it
corrects inequalities between right holders and guarantees that
each category of right holders benefits from a fair share of the
value.

 NO – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO OPINION

66. How would changes in levies with respect to the application
to online services (e.g. services based on cloud computing
allowing, for instance, users to have copies on different
devices) impact the development and functioning of new business
models on the one hand and rightholders’ revenue on the other?

[Open question]

Where authors and publishers are remunerated for certain uses on
the basis of copyright levies, the device and storage medium
remuneration is also payable if protected works are copied in
connection with online services (e.g. cloud computing). That
is, for example, the case if works are downloaded from a cloud
portal and stored on a PC or storage medium.

More copying for private use takes place now than ever before.
Consumers transfer songs and videos from computers to hard
drives to phones to tablets to online lockers and back again in
order to save and access their personal libraries whenever and
wherever they want. All of these processes are undeniably acts
of private copying.

The private copying systems should take into account all these
copies made on different devices through online services,
including cloud computing services. This does not hinder the
development and functioning of new business models.

67. Would you see an added value in making levies visible on the
invoices for products subject to levies?5

This issue was also addressed in the recommendations of Mr
Antonio Vitorino resulting from the mediation on private
copying and reprography levies.

 YES – Please explain

Levies should be clearly visible on all bills and contracts in
the sales chain and for consumers. Consumers should be informed
of the amount of the levy and where that money goes. More
generally they should be informed of how this mechanism
compensates their freedom to copy.This would help consumers
understand that they are part of, and benefit from, this
virtuous system which is very important for authors and
Europe’s culture.

Diverging national systems levy different products and apply
different tariffs. This results in obstacles to the free
circulation of goods and services in the Single Market. At the
same time, many Member States continue to allow the
indiscriminate application of private copying levies to all
transactions irrespective of the person to whom the product
subject to a levy is sold (e.g. private person or business). In
that context, not all Member States have ex ante exemption
and/or ex post reimbursement schemes which could remedy these
situations and reduce the number of undue payments.

 NO – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO OPINION

Diverging national systems levy different products and apply
different tariffs. This results in obstacles to the free
circulation of goods and services in the Single Market. At the
same time, many Member States continue to allow the
indiscriminate application of private copying levies to all
transactions irrespective of the person to whom the product
subject to a levy is sold (e.g. private person or business). In
that context, not all Member States have ex ante exemption
and/or ex post reimbursement schemes which could remedy these
situations and reduce the number of undue payments6

This issue was also addressed in the recommendations of Mr
Antonio Vitorino resulting from the mediation on private
copying and reprography levies.

.

68. Have you experienced a situation where a cross-border
transaction resulted in undue levy payments, or duplicate
payments of the same levy, or other obstacles to the free
movement of goods or services?

 YES – Please specify the type of transaction and indicate
the percentage of the undue payments. Please also indicate how
a priori exemption and/or ex post reimbursement schemes could
help to remedy the situation.

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

X NO– Please explain

In respect of text and image levies, the refund of device and
storage medium remuneration in the event of export takes place
through the responsible RRO, without problems in the vast
majority of cases. On the other hand, there are substantial
problems linked to vendors of devices based in another EU
Member State refusing to pay the levy19.

EU regulations are required to ensure that, in relation to
import/export of devices, there is no ambiguity with respect to
the obligation to pay the levy according to the tariffs and
methods of the country of destination to the RRO in that
country. In this respect, it should also be clarified that any
dispute should be regulated in and in accordance with the rules
of the country where the levy shall be collected.

19 - See, for instance: Case C 521/11, Amazon v. Austro-Mechana,
11 July, 2013,
http://curia.europa.eu/juris/document/document.jsf?doclang=EN&text=&pageIndex=0&part=1&mode=DOC&docid=139407&occ=first&dir=&cid=7739717

 NO OPINION

69. What percentage of products subject to a levy is sold to
persons other than natural persons for purposes clearly
unrelated to private copying? Do any of those transactions
result in undue payments? Please explain in detail the example
you provide (type of products, type of transaction,
stakeholders, etc.).

[Open question]

In respect of text and image (reprography) levies, the question
is irrelevant, as noted also in the report from the
EC-appointed mediator António Vitorino20. Unlike the scope of
the private copying exception under EUCD Article 5.2(b), which
is limited to reproductions that serve a specific purpose ("for
private use") regardless of the type of device and method, the
reprography exception under EUCD Article 5.2(a) covers
reproductions on a specific medium (paper), using a specific
method ("any kind of photographic technique"), regardless of
its purpose, which may be for professional, educational,
private and other uses21. This means that the reprography
levies cover both private and professional uses.

Consequently, when it comes to analysing the impact of
reprography levies, it is not relevant to make a distinction
between private and professional uses, since both of them are
subject to the payment of a levy. Against this background, it
is also unnecessary to distinguish between sales of devices in
the private and business sectors. The point is that copies are
permitted by law in both the private and business spheres. The
– unified – device and storage medium remuneration can
therefore be justified both for sales to private persons and
sales to business end users.

20 -
http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/copyright/docs/levy_reform/130131_levies-vitorino-recommendations_en.pdf,
page 10

21 -
http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/copyright/docs/levy_reform/130131_levies-vitorino-recommendations_en.pdf
page 16.

70. Where such undue payments arise, what percentage of trade do
they affect? To what extent could a priori exemptions and/or ex
post reimbursement schemes existing in some Member States help
to remedy the situation?

[Open question]

We refer to our response to question 69, which, in short, states
that, under EUCD Article 5.2(a), text and image (reprography)
levies also covers professional uses. Question 70 therefore
becomes irrelevant in relation to text and image (reprography)
levies.

71. If you have identified specific problems with the current
functioning of the levy system, how would these problems best
be solved?

[Open question]

A main problem is the tendency to mix private copying levies and
text and image (reprography) levies, and to discuss the
reprography levy as if it were identical to private copy
levies. This is not the case; the two levy schemes are
different (see question 69). The EU could contribute to
clarification through sensitising EC officials and EU policy
makers and institutions that text and image (reprography) and
private levies are different, and ensure consistency in their
dealing with the two different levy schemes.

Also, as mentioned under question 68, the obligation for
exporters to pay the levy according to the rules of the country
of destination should be regulated.

V. Fair remuneration of authors and performers

72.[In particular if you are an author/performer:] What is the
best mechanism (or combination of mechanisms) to ensure that
you receive an adequate remuneration for the exploitation of
your works and performances?

[Open question]

For screenwriters and directors, such a ‘best mechanism’ to
ensure that they receive proportional remuneration for the
exploitation of their works on all media and platforms does not
yet exist uniformly in Europe. ‘Adequate remuneration’ should
relate to the use made of the authors’ works and should in
particular reward the success of works. This is why buy-out
contracts, which prevent this from happening, would never
amount to mechanisms guaranteeing adequate remuneration.

Contractual practices in many European countries deprive
screenwriters and directors of their rights and prevent them
from receiving fair remuneration, in particular for the online
distribution of their works. Screenwriters and directors are
too often forced, because of theirweak bargaining position and
the absence of legislation to protect them, to assign all their
rights to the producer or broadcaster and receive a one-off fee
at the production stage with no further payments linked to the
exploitation of the work, except for collectively managed
rights.

These further payments linked to the exploitation of the work
are however essential for authors to make a living in-between
projects. The characteristic of this profession is that it can
take years to prepare a film and enter into production.

I therefore support the SAA proposal to by-pass these possible
unfair contractual practices and to develop a sustainable
remuneration system at EU level which would secure audiovisual
authors’ remuneration for their making available right in the
digital market.

For secondary uses administered by RROs, fair compensation is
ensured via the RROs’ distribution rules and the requirement of
appropriate representation by both authors and publishers on its
decision-making bodies.

73. Is there a need to act at the EU level (for instance to
prohibit certain clauses in contracts)?

X YES– Please explain

I support an intervention by the Commission to ensure fair
remuneration for the exploitation of works and fair contractual
practices.

In many European countries, screenwriters and directors suffer
from unfair contractual terms (excessive transfer of rights in
terms of scope and duration, transfer of rights to
remuneration, etc.) imposed by producers or broadcasters in the
negotiation of their individual contract. Fairer contractual
terms and practices are needed.

I know that this will not solve all the problems, in particular
the remuneration issue for the exploitation of works. Any
initiative in this field should therefore complement the
introduction into EU legislation of an unwaivable and
inalienable right to remuneration of audiovisual authors for
their making available right, based on the revenues generated
from the online distribution of their works and collected from
final distributors and distributed to authors by collective
management organisations.

 NO – Please explain why

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO OPINION

74. If you consider that the current rules are not effective,
what would you suggest to address the shortcomings you
identify?

[Open question]

I suggest introducing a piece of European legislation which
would provide audiovisual authors with an unwaivable and
inalienable right to remuneration for the exploitation of their
works based on the revenues generated from the distribution of
the works and collected from final distributors by collective
management organisations who will distribute it to authors.

In parallel, consideration should be given to developing key
standards for fair and enforceable contractual terms in
individual contracts, including the prohibition of certain
clauses in contracts.

VI. Respect for rights

75. Should the civil enforcement system in the EU be rendered
more efficient for infringements of copyright committed with a
commercial purpose?

X YES– Please explain

Wider legal access to works can only be achieved through
appropriate mechanisms which include direct licensing by
authors and publishers and collective management of rights,
combined with financial incentives, protection against
infringement and copyright enforcement, including efficient
combating of piracy and other forms of unauthorised
reproduction. CMOs play an indispensable role in assisting
authors and publishers to enable wider legal access to their
works and in awareness raising and enforcement of rights.

 NO – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO OPINION

76. In particular, is the current legal framework clear enough
to allow for sufficient involvement of intermediaries (such as
Internet service providers, advertising brokers, payment
service providers, domain name registrars, etc.) in inhibiting
online copyright infringements with a commercial purpose? If
not, what measures would be useful to foster the cooperation of
intermediaries?

[Open question]

Collaboration with Internet Service Providers (ISPs) to address
copyright infringement and enforcement issues is welcome. The
Commission could facilitate initiatives in this respect through
financial contributions to awareness-raising campaigns. The use
of systems to inform about authorised use (e.g. through search
engines using the ACAP22) are also highly welcome and should be
encouraged. These actions help in enforcing contractual terms
and preventing the networks from being used to infringe
intellectual property.

The Commission should also encourage the investment in new
business models. The establishment of a sustainable legal
offer, reflecting the cultural diversity of the European
written sector, can only take place in an environment ensuring
the full respect of copyright and, therefore, the – financial –
independence of creators. Against this background, werequest
that the Commission maintains a stable and predictable legal
framework, promoting its rationale and its enforcement by all
players.

22 - http://www.the-acap.org/

77. Does the current civil enforcement framework ensure that the
right balance is achieved between the right to have one’s
copyright respected and other rights such as the protection of
private life and protection of personal data?

X YES– Please explain

The right balance of protection of copyright with other
fundamental rights, such as privacy and protection of personal
data, needs to be found on the basis of the principle of
proportionality, in the discretion of Member States (see the
cases Productores de Música de España (Promusicae) v Telefónica
de España SAU (C-275/0623) and LSG-Gesellschaft zur Wahrnehmung
von Leistungsschutzrechten GmbH v Tele2 Telecommunication GmbH
(C-557/0724)).

23 -
http://curia.europa.eu/juris/liste.jsf?language=en&num=C-275/06

24 -
http://curia.europa.eu/juris/liste.jsf?language=en&num=C-557/07

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO OPINION

VII. A single EU Copyright Title

The idea of establishing a unified EU Copyright Title has been
present in the copyright debate for quite some time now,
although views as to the merits and the feasibility of such an
objective are divided. A unified EU Copyright Title would
totally harmonise the area of copyright law in the EU and
replace national laws. There would then be a single EU title
instead of a bundle of national rights. Some see this as the
only manner in which a truly Single Market for content
protected by copyright can be ensured, while others believe
that the same objective can better be achieved by establishing
a higher level of harmonisation while allowing for a certain
degree of flexibility and specificity in Member States’ legal
systems.

78. Should the EU pursue the establishment of a single EU
Copyright Title, as a means of establishing a consistent
framework for rights and exceptions to copyright across the EU,
as well as a single framework for enforcement?

 YES

 X NO

 NO OPINION

79. Should this be the next step in the development of copyright
in the EU? Does the current level of difference among the Member
State legislation mean that this is a longer term project?

[Open question]

In respect of the copyright legal framework, the EU should
continue to pursue a pragmatic approach. Rather than
emphasising a single EU Copyright Title, the focus should be on
the adoption of an overall intellectual property (IP) strategy.
Several studies have documented the importance of the IP sector
to the EU economy and employment: For example, IPR intensive
industries contribute to 39% of the EU’s GDP and 26% of the
EU’s employment; 90% of its export comes from IP intensive
industries. Within the IP sector, the copyright sector
contributes with a positive trade balance. On a short, medium
and longer term, an overarching EU IP strategy is required and
urgent to maintain this situation.

Work on a single EU Copyright Title would require substantial
resources and unnecessarily distract focus from the important
work on an overall EU IP strategy. Also, it is difficult to see
how it could be established on the basis of Article 118 of the
Lisbon Treaty (TFEU). The different traditions and systems,
which include both common and civil law practices benefit from
being maintained. Even if sufficient unanimity should be
reached amongst EU Member States as to the nature of EU
copyright legislation, it is difficult to see that an
overarching EU Copyright Title is required.

VIII. Other issues

The above questionnaire aims to provide a comprehensive
consultation on the most important matters relating to the
current EU legal framework for copyright. Should any important
matters have been omitted, we would appreciate if you could
bring them to our attention, so they can be properly addressed
in the future.

80. Are there any other important matters related to the EU
legal framework for copyright? Please explain and indicate how
such matters should be addressed.

[Open question]

We suggest that the creation of a specialised panel of judges,
responsible for copyright legal matters, is created at the
CJEU. More and more cases on copyright issues are decided by
the CJEU. This requires a stable institution with copyright
experts.

It is crucial that the European debate on copyright places
creators at the centre of attention. After years of distrust
and attacks against copyright by users’ and consumers’ groups
who just want to undermine the system, there is an essential
need to ensure that the system works for creators and promotes
creativity, freedom of expression and dissemination of culture.

More legitimacy for copyright means ensuring that creators are
the first and main beneficiaries of the licence fees and
remuneration paid by users. The SAA made very important
proposals in this respect and I support them.

