


Public Consultationonthe review oftheEUcopyright rules

Contents

.  Introduction  2

A  Context of the consultation2

B:  How to submit replies to this questionnaire  3

C  Confidentiality3

.  Rights and the functioning of the Single Market  7

A  Why is it not possible to access many online content services
from anywhere in Europe?7

B:  Is there a need for more clarity as regards the scope of
what needs to be authorised (or not) in digital

transmissions?10

Ļ  The act of "making available"  10

.  Two rights involved in a single act ofexploitation!1

.  Linking and browsing  12

.  Download to own digital content  13

C  Registration of works and other subject matter-is it a good
idea?14

.  How to improve the use and interoperability of identifiers15

.  Term of protection-is it appropriate?15

.  Limitations and exceptions in the Single Market  16

A  Access to content in libraries and archives  19

1  Preservation and archiving19

2  Off-premises access to library collections  20

.  E-lending  21

.  Mass digitisation22

.  Teaching23

.  Research25

.  Disabilities  25

E  Text and data mining  27

F  User-generated content  28

.  Private copying and reprography31

.  Fair remuneration of authors and performers33

.  Respect for rights34

A singleEUCopyright Title36

Other issues  36

I.Introduction

Context of the consultation

Over the last two decades, digital technology and the Internet
have reshaped the ways in which content is created,
distributed, and accessed. New opportunitieshave materialised
for those that create and produce content (e.g. a film, a
novel, a song), for new and existing distribution platforms,
for institutions such as libraries, for activities such as
research and for citizens who now expect to be able to access
content-for information, education or entertainment
purposes-regardless of geographical borders.

This new environment also presents challenges. One of them is
for the market to continue to adapt to new forms of
distribution and use. Another one is for the legislator to
ensure that the system of rights, limitations to rights and
enforcement remains appropriate and is adapted to the new
environment. This consultation focuses on the second of these
challenges: ensuring that theEUcopyright regulatory framework
stays fit for purpose in the digital environment to support
creation and innovation, tap the full potential of the Single
Market, foster growth and investment in our economy and promote
cultural diversity.

In its "Communication on Content in the Digital Single
Market"1the Commission set out two parallel tracks of action:
on the one hand, to complete its on-going effort to review and
to modernise theEUcopyright legislative framework23with a view
to a decision in2014on whether to table legislative reform
proposals, and on the other, to facilitate practical
industry-led solutions through the stakeholder dialogue
"Licences for Europe" on issues on which rapid progress was
deemed necessary and possible.

The "Licences for Europe" process has been finalised now4. The
Commission welcomes the practical solutions stakeholders have
put forward in this context and will monitor their progress.
Pledges have been made by stakeholders in all four Working
Groups (cross border portability of services, user-generated
content, audiovisual and film heritage and text and data
mining). Taken together, the Commission expects these pledges
to be a further step in making theuserenvironment easier in
many different situations. The Commission also takes note of
the factthat two groups-user-generated content and text and
data mining-did not reach consensus among

participating stakeholders on either the problems to be
addressed or on the results. The discussions and results of
"Licences for Europe" will be also taken into account in the
context of the review of the legislative framework.

As part of the review process, the Commission is now launching a
public consultation on issues identified in theCommunication on
Content in the Digital Single Market, i.e.:"territoriality in
the Internal Market,harmonisation,limitations and exceptions to
copyright in the digital age; fragmentation of theEUcopyright
market; and how to improve the effectiveness and efficiency of
enforcement while underpinning its legitimacy in the wider
context of copyright reform". Ashighlighted in the
October2013European Council Conclusions5"Providing digital
services and content across the single market requires the
establishment of a copyright regime for the digital age. The
Commissionwill therefore complete its on-going review of
theEUcopyright framework in spring2014.It is important to
modernise Europe's copyright regime and facilitate licensing,
while ensuring a high level protection of intellectual property
rights and taking into account cultural diversity".

This consultation builds on previous consultations and public
hearings, in particular those on the "Green Paper on copyright
in the knowledge economy"6, the "Green Paper on the online
distribution of audiovisual works"7and"Content Online"8. These
consultations provided valuable feedback from stakeholders on a
number of questions, on issues as diverse as the territoriality
of copyright and possible ways to overcome territoriality,
exceptions related to the online dissemination of knowledge,
and rightholders' remuneration, particularly in the audiovisual
sector. Views were expressed by stakeholders representing all
stages in the value chain, including right holders,
distributors, consumers, and academics. The questions elicited
widely diverging views on the best way to proceed. The "Green
Paper on Copyright in the Knowledge Economy" was followed up by
a Communication. The replies to the "Green Paper on the online
distribution of audiovisual works" have fed into subsequent
discussions on the Collective Rights Management Directive and
into the current review process.

How to submit replies to this questionnaire

You are kindly asked to send your repliesby5February2014as a
word orpdfdocument to the following e-mail address of DG
Internal Market and
Services:markt-copyright-consultation@ec.europa.eu.Please note
that replies sent after that date will not be taken into
account.

This consultation is addressed to different categories of
stakeholders. To the extent possible, the questions indicate
the category/ies of respondents most likely to be concerned by
them (annotation in brackets, before the actual question).
Respondents should nevertheless feel free to reply to any/all
of the questions. Also, please note that, apart from the
question concerning the identification of the respondent, none
of the questions is obligatory. Replies containing answers only
to part of the questions will be also accepted.

You are requested to provide your answers directly within this
consultation document. For the "Yes/No/No opinion" questions
please put the selected answer inboldandunderlineit so it is
easy for us to see your selection.

Inyour answers to the questions, you are invited to refer to the
situation inEUMember States.You are also invited in particular
to indicate, where relevant, what would be the impact of
options you put forward in terms of costs, opportunities and
revenues.

The public consultation is available in English. Responses may,
however, be sent in any of the24official languages of theEU.

Confidentiality

The contributions received in this round of consultation as well
as a summary report presenting the responses in a statistical
and aggregated form will be published on the website ofDG
MARKT.

Please note that all contributions received will be published
together with the identity of the contributor, unless the
contributor objects to the publication of their personal data
on the grounds that such publication would harm his or her
legitimate interests. In this case, the contribution will be
published in anonymous form upon the contributor's explicit
request. Otherwise the contribution will not bepublished nor
will its content be reflected in the summary report.

Please read ourPrivacy statement.

Please identify yourself:

Name:

In the interests of transparency,organisations (including, for
example,NGOs,trade associations and commercial enterprises) are
invited to provide the public with relevant information about
themselves by registering in the Interest Representative
Register and subscribing to its Code ofConduct.

•If you are a Registered organisation, please indicate your
Register ID number below. Your contribution will then be
considered as representing the views of your organisation.

•If your organisation is not registered, you have the
opportunity toregister now. Responses from organisations not
registered will be published separately.

If you would like to submit your reply on an anonymous basis
please indicate it belowby underlining the following answer:

Yes, I would like to submit my reply on an anonymous basis

Type of respondent(Pleaseunderlinethe appropriate):

End user/consumer(e.g. internet user, reader, subscriber to
music or audiovisual service, researcher,student)OR
Representativeof end users/consumers

^ for the purposes of this questionnaire normally referred to in
questions as"end users/consumers"****

Institutional user(e.g. school, university, research centre,
library, archive)OR Representative of institutional users

^ for the purposes of this questionnaire normally referred to in
questions as"institutional users"

Author/Performer OR Representative of authors/performers*******

Publisher/Producer/BroadcasterOR Representative of
publishers/producers/broadcasters

^the two above categoriesare, for the purposes of this
questionnaire, normally referred to in questions as"right
holders"

Intermediary/Distributor/Other service provider(e.g. online
music or audiovisual service, gamesplatform, social media,
search engine, ICT industry)OR Representative of
intermediaries/distributors/other service providers

^ for the purposes of this questionnaire normally referred to in
questions as"service providers"

Collective Management Organisation

Public authority

Member State

Other(Please explain):******

A sole Mixed Media Artist witha compulsion to create original
content as Producer Distributor

Broadcaster

I.Rights and he functioning of the Single Market

Why is it not possible to access many online content services
from anywhere in Europe?

[The territorial scope of the rights involved in digital
transmissions and the segmentation of the market through
licensing agreements]

Holders of copyright and related rights-e.g. writers, singers,
musicians-do not enjoy a single protection in theEU.Instead,
they are protected on the basis of a bundle of national rights
in each Member State. Those rights have been largely harmonised
by the existingEUDirectives. However, differences remain and the
geographical scope of the rights is limited to the territory of
the Member State granting them. Copyright is thus territorial
in the sense that rights are acquired and enforced on a
country-by-country basis under national law9.

The dissemination of copyright-protected content on the
Internet-e.g. by a music streaming service, or by an online
e-book seller-therefore requires, in principle, an
authorisation for each national territory in which the content
is communicated to the public. Rightholders are, of course,in a
position to grant a multi-territorial or pan- European licence,
such that content services can be provided in several Member
States and across borders. A number of steps have been taken at
EU level to facilitate multi-territorial licences: the proposal
for a Directive on Collective Rights Management10should
significantly facilitate the delivery of multi-territorial
licences in musical works for online services11; the structured
stakeholder dialogue "Licences for Europe"12and market-led
developmentssuch as the on-going work in the Linked Content
Coalition13.

"Licences for Europe" addressed in particular the specific issue
of cross-border portability, i.e. the ability of consumers
having subscribed to online services in their Member State to
keep accessing them when travelling temporarily to other Member
States. As a result, representatives of the audio-visual sector
issued a joint statement affirming their commitment to continue
working towards the further development of cross-border
portability14.

Despite progress, there are continued problems with the
cross-border provision of, and access to, services. These
problems are most obvious to consumers wanting to access
services that are made available in Member States other than
the one in which they live. Not all online services are
available in all Member States and consumers face problems when
trying to access such services across borders. In some
instances, even if the "same" service is available in all
Member States, consumers cannot access the service across
borders (they can only access their "national" service, and if
they try to access the "same" service in another Member State
they are redirected to the one designated for their country of
residence).

This situation may in part stem from the territoriality of
rights and difficulties associated with the clearing of rights
in different territories. Contractual clauses in licensing
agreements between right holders and distributors and/or
between distributors and end users may also be at the origin of
some of the problems (denial of access, redirection).

The main issue at stake here is, therefore, whether further
measures (legislative or non-legislative, including market-led
solutions) need to be taken atEUlevel in the medium term15to
increase the cross-border availability of content services in
the Single Market, while ensuring an adequate level of
protection for right holders.

1.[In particular if you are an end user/consumer:]Have you faced
problems when trying to access onlineservices in anEUMember
State other than the one in which you live?

YES-Please provide examples indicating the Member State, the
sector and the type of content concerned (e.g. premium content
such as certain films and TV series, audio-visual content in
general, music, e-books, magazines, journals and newspapers,
games, applications and other software)

A. As an end user and producer of Artistic content, some of my
films have been streamed without proper credit in the US and
were barredfrom online viewing in the UK and in Europe. A video
titled Come to my Aid by Simply Red was broadcast from unknown
sources without any respect to any credit, production details,
audio-visual permissions and /or multi-national license from
the creator/producer. The film could not be viewed in Uk and
subsequently when seen some years later it was an obvious
pirated copy of low quality. This denigrated the Artistic
quality of the film when originally shot to 35mm high standard.
Notwithstanding, I was informed the same video could not be seen
in Italy, Spain as member States. it has received380,000hits of
whichias the creator /producer received no credit, no backdated
licence and/or any expected Royalties.

NO

NO OPINION

1.[In particular if youarea service provider:]Have you faced
problems when seeking to provide online services across borders
intheEU?

YES-Please explain whether such problems, in your experience,
are related to copyright or to other issues (e.g. business
decisions relating tothe cost of providing services across
borders, compliance with other laws such as consumer
protection)? Please provide examples indicating the Member
State, the sector and the type of content concerned (e.g.
premium content such as certain films and TV series,
audio-visual content in general, music,e­books,magazines,
journals and newspapers, games, applications and other
software).

NO**

NO OPINION

1.[In particular if you are a right holder or a collective
management organisation:]How often are you asked to grant
multi-territorial licences? Please indicate, if possible, the
number of requests per year and provide examples indicating the
Member State, the sector and the type of content concerned.

[Open question]

I am a rights holder by original creation of a sculptural
work(Artifact) of artistic expression and craft, first
exhibited in an International periodical with extensive media
subscription that was asserted with copyright notices, due to
its unique qualities.

Some  years later, subsequent "infinite" copies were
manufactured by various B2B multinational corporations in
cultural initiative campaigns and sold as a merchandising
device for economic generation, emotional branding and
celebrity/charity pr. (Theyhave now reached critical mass
beyond a billion sold).

At no time did the named infringers and/or entities concerned
request any licence, multinationally, across Member States,
locally and /or carry out required legal copyright
investigations beforereadymadeappropriation, seeding,
exploitation and customisation.

In  fact my Artifact was industrialized without even the legal
right that assertion of copyright as a Prior work affords.
Instead infinite variations were sold acrossmultiterritories
andcountries in import and export clusters in escalating
International sales.

Subsequently multi-territorial licences are required from
"magnanimous" multi-nationals corporate, who are legally
positioned (by insurance indemnity, politically
influenceandnumerous client conflicts), to act and exploit
beyond the law.

Furthermore the infringers concerned, disregard formal Notice's
of copyright in line with Alternative Dispute Resolution
processes which give no optionbut to seek future legal remedy
for a fair hearing.

GMulti-territorial licence permissions could be enforced by a
chosen collecting society in support of a rights holder, to
clawback and secure outstanding Royalties.

This awaits furtherEUcopyrightdirectives to help protect and
enforce copyright infringement, which hopefully may grant a
level playing field when rights are exploited in extreme
infringement by numerous bodies corporate.

Althoughiam the known rights holder,
acrossmultinationalterritories and countries by exhibition, not
once did I receive a request to grant a proper licence when
rights holder and copyright information is in plain view.

J. The"Livestrong"campaign was orchestrated andlaunched publicly
online as a new innovative online business model for generating
charity funds by the appropriation of my object symbol and
Artifact. This generated further spawned initiatives but was
not the zietgeist of origination.

1.If you have identified problems in the answers to any of the
questions above-what would be the best way to tackle them?

[Open question]

The service providers needto indemnify themselves against any
future claims for copyright infringement from rights holders,
by regulated assertion and prosecution for any commercial
exploitation by predator marketeers and/or"bedroom
broadcasters" in breach of the original owners rights.

For example the record company and/or the group (who financially
benefit by the broadcast of a commercialaudi­visualwork by
title), are FORMALLY put on Notice to confirm the true content
rights holders details by credit (registered by broadcast
display and on record in the collecting society

as an audio-visual work by title),

License permissions also need to be embedded in all works, to
ascertain the true copyright and/or rights holder, in order to
facilitate accessible contact details to obtain the said
permissions. Visual Arts collecting societies such as DACS seem
not to be positioned yet with creative industry support

or technological system identifiers to digitally encrypt
Artworks, therefor digitally register works with personal
tracking codes and/or make online connections to collect
multi-territorial remuneration due.

Everything seems geared towards visual content distribution as
the honey for advertising and sponsorship benefit without
crumbs to the original creator and/or rights holdersfrom that
corporate table.

If at least, the creators details are in transparent view (as on
a rights holders personal website), the secondaryexploiteris
legally required to showproof of licence or that the proper
investigative searches have been carried out in the absence of
any contractual confirmations or contract.

In the absence of such they are therefor in breach of copyright
by default at source.

The  vehicle by which thecontent of the rights holder is
distributed, transmitted and/or broadcast (ie the broadcast
provider such as Youtube) must take respectful responsibility
for the content rights they manage, as if a store holder was in
receipt of and selling stolen property or goods, which may be
the case.

Further the relevant broadcaster will need to issue take down
non-compliance orders and/or prosecute the uploader of the
clip, if they are unable to show proof of multi national
licence or territorial compliance.

Furthermore show proof that the rights being exploited if an
"orphan work" is confirmed by Museum Archives and/or that the
work is respected it's true paternity to license by origination
and assertion in the first instance.

This will then allow rights holders to police their works and
minimize opportunist exploitation, even by circumventive
distribution partnerships in innocence of exploitation. An
incentive to do this may be the at the least, obtaining a value
of integrity acquired in requesting the ownership status up
front.

Should  rights be exploited ona multiterritorial scale and/or by
unfair competition, it may be nigh impossible in retrospect, to
even requestmultiterritorial licence, when exploitationhas
reached a saturated critical mass across B2b online
distribution networks.

For example how could even PRS prosecute for infinite multi
territorial exploitation by their associative partners such as
Universal?

Copyright  reformsneed to set the agenda for moral
responsibility and education beyond fair use, in respect to
original creation, as well as enforce the legal obligation to
obtain licence with penalties if in default.

In the visual arts there seems to be an "exploit and see"
attitude, some exploiters protected by online anonymity,
connection power or formidable influence by numerous legal
retainers, to avoid any legal prosecution.

Therefor protection for visual arts rights holders cannot exist
without collecting societies in place.

Rights holders hoping to protect their works against formidable
exploitation and position, could face an overwhelming burden of
time and proof necessary, to substantiate evidence for a case in
merit, as well as open ended escalating legalcosts.

The  collecting society,PRShave been crucial in not only
generating more music Internationally but also in securing
multi national licences for it's musicians. They have been
proactive across the board in educating generations of djmixer
/composer/producers in respect to sampling.

In the music industry one can obtain a livelihood. An Artist on
the other hand is expected to starve destitute to be recognized
for that which his exploiters of his works perversely benefit..

If an Artifact is copied by industrialization to become a
product, then the Artist should not be expected to face such
financial opposition to protect his livelihood in his lifetime.
Creative effort should be respected if leading to exceptional
public benefit.

J. Further the invention of new apps, that could recognize any
music track will be instrumental in this protection process. A
musician who had his music bootlegged could obtain legal
recourse with instant evidence and support in protecting his
rights withPRSunless a named Artist of perceived repute stole
his first song.

This is not the case in the visual Arts.

K. A collecting society should be run by the relevant rights
holders and forensic accountants supported with the latest
innovative apps to empowera fluid process of payments.

If one creates a unique work "before its time" without a
collecting society in place to represent and protect the
integrity of an Artists IP, it can be exploitedmulti-nationally
and the proper licence may take years to acquire., to even be in
a legal position to grant the licence whilst it becomes common
place by exploitive saturation.

L. The future ongoing integration of online regulated
registration services will help audio visual Artists assert
their rights, obtain licensepermissions and royalties, as in
the current landscape of music.

M. The internet should be split by payment accounting systems
linked and separated by commercial and non - commercial. Non-
commercial being where bedroom broadcasters send it to their
friends for fair use and educational purposes which is free but
credited.

Commercial broadcasts on the other hand feed off the rights
holders and/or creators copyright interests and therefor should
by right, support and compensate them by way of reasonable
percentage royalties as well as allow license from "profit of
accounts" claw back.

N.Online broadcast and distribution should not profit further
from a 'free for all" foundation built on the bones of rights
holders enduring the overwhelming burden of exponential online
exploitation ad infinitum.

O. Online service providers should create a regulated percentage
slush fund from their huge profits to help protect right holders
legally and/or otherwise, in the interests of good faith,
dispute resolution and transparent CSR.

P. Creativity,innovation and inventionare societies true source
capital. The distribution networks are secondary and must toe
the line legally in respect to gross copyright exploitation.

1.[Inparticular if you are a rightholder or a collective
management organisation:]Are there reasons why, even in cases
where you hold all the necessary rights for all the territories
in question, you would still find it necessary or justified to
impose territorial restrictions on a service provider (in
order, for instance, to ensure that access to certain content
is not possible in certain European countries)?

YES-Please explain by giving examples

In my experience, imposing an injunction or any territorial
restriction, could be considered, if the intrinsic value of the
rights content is compromised by distribution or broadcast, or
it could be disadvantageous, morally or otherwise.

Further if their intrinsic value is compromised by a service
provider, it couldbe by the quality of broadcast and/or the
work attracted unwanted associative branding and/or became
worthless by the devaluation of reaching a saturated critical
mass as industrial product copies.

That the only recourse available may be to impose restrictions
but then how to enforce them may then be the question outside a
Court of Law.

Widespread exploitation could further bar an individual ,Artist
or rights holder from imposing restrictions due to the
complications of multiple adjoined suits and/or against
defendants in collective collusion. Furthermore the legal
learning curve required could frustrate his occupation to
create greater works in consequence.

Allegations of fraud , counterfeit copying, piracy and/or unjust
enrichment could involveenforcement bodies which need direction
from Court Judgement against the perpetrators, in order to
enforce any territorial restrictions. This can quickly spiral
towards Jarndice and Jarndice proportions by Court costs and
time expended.

Notwithstanding jurisdiction rules faced, that are not unified
in the rights holders interests of copyright protection.,
through fast track systems to enforcement and hopeful final
settlement. This falling within the burden bore by the rights
holder who have probably obtained no economic benefit and/or
are the victims of exploitation.

it seems justified in principle, if the case in merit was that
an original Artifact, was industrialized as a"readymade"product
copy, to become so commonplace and laudedby deceptive
plagiarism,it's true paternity and origination was buried under
the marketing onslaught.

Collective saturation by online distribution, marketing and
sales may bury the factual copyright asserted and fixed in time
as a "prior" work, crafted, photographed and exhibited.

However,  if the Artifact was a crafted expression then it
warrants legal protection as the innovative Icon it was
designed by process to be.

(In fact, an Artwork containing the photograph of my signature
Artifact, was given personal approval by Mr Andy Warhol to
exhibit in Interview Magazine, due to the Artifact's obvious
value, expressive quality and Artistic qualities of
craftsmanship). Without his approval, it could have not been
exhibited.

Furthermore if any reproduction rights have been disregarded,
imposing restrictions empowers the rights holder with some
small leverage against Goliath's with unlimited financial
influence to avoid legal obligations.

J. Restrictions may also apply if therewas an exploitive
partnership with third party broadcasters or that a work was a
form of High Art "customomized" with an intended targeted
audience in mind. That was to be viewed specifically offline in
a Gallery and/or the work caused such a controversial moral
panic

opposite to the works intended desired response, it was
withdrawn.

K. Original works created before their time so often manifest
strong opposition, political ramifications and the undesired
possibility of further industrializationwithout license.

Therefor the rights holder should have the option to control the
territories of public consummation, considering the ease at
which networks now discover and commercially capitalize without
any effort of creation by applied processes or sweat of brow.
Deceptive business driven to commercially exploit a
distribution vehicle.

L. Any that distribute and trade in IP, online or on any formats
(unless for education institutions), need to respect, acquire
and pay the appropriate licences as in theoffline World across
the board.

NO

NO OPINION

1.[Inparticular if you are e.g. a broadcaster or a service
provider:]Are there reasons why, even in cases where you have
acquired all the necessary rights for all the territories in
question, you would still find

itnecessary or justified to impose territorial restrictions on
the service recipient (in order for instance, to redirect the
consumer to a different website than the one he is trying to
access)?

YES-Please explain by giving examples

A.Againit is a question of the legal right, of the rights holder
to be legally recognised and appreciated for their works by fair
recompense. Unfortunately, the issue from the ground up (as a
creator rights holder), is that the exploiters continue their
parasiticprofit until at the last

they are issued with territorial restrictions and need to
backtrack their negligent legal oversight.

NO OPINION

1.Do you think that further measures (legislative
ornon-legislative, including market-led solutions) are needed
atEUlevel to increase the cross-border availability of content
services in the Single Market, while ensuring an adequate level
ofprotection for right holders?

YES-Please explain

The introduction of compulsory licensing by legislative
intervention of the EU could put the entities who exploit
without rights on formal legal notice and possibly minimize
exploitation of copyright, IP and related rights. The market of
the internet however seems to lead exploitation without
protective legislation.

Collecting societies working with the rights holders and/or
their legal representatives by way ofCFAand/or profit share
could protectthe rights holders livelihood and generate much
needed income for that respective society. This could be
underwritten by Insurance companies within indemnity not
available to some visual artists

and/or rights holders.

Without legal intervention,a rights holder is forced to endure
first a burden of proof to obtain the evidence to support a
case in merit, navigate closed online networks operating
without full company disclosure, so as to uncover the core
engineers of the said exploitation and then after all this
investigation, obtain proper addresses in order to serve the
respective legal documents. This could be a feat of endurance
considering how cheap copies of his Artifact were manufactured,
distributed and sold.

All operating across the internet should be fully transparent in
their business dealings so as rights holders and/or society in
moral support can account for profits, on formal request during
the ADR process. Competition has to be fair in access to markets
in free trade and exploitationof such.

Unless the content service providers are brought legally into
line by legislative authority, the collecting societies and/or
rights holders cannot obtain the information they require, to
proceed and protect their IP interests if exploited by unknown
third party subcontractors

bound by 'unseen" confidential agreements with the said
providers.

Content services could be theengines by which rights holders
information can be collected, distributed to the relevant tier
structure first as an archive (of rights holders), hyperlink
direction towards the relevant collecting society for account
licence verifications and subsequentpayments for licence and
royalties.

In transparent, above the board transactions, trust is generated
which creates a subconscious value of mutual respect in the 21st
Century, as rights holders become "shareholders" willing to
entrust increased cross border availability to licencee's.

NO - Please explain

NO OPINION

Isthere a need for more clarity as regards the scope of what
needs to be authorised (or not) in digital transmissions?

[The definition of the rightsinvolved in digital transmissions]

The EU framework for the protection of copyright and related
rights in the digital environment is largely established by
Directive 2001/29/EC16on theharmonisationof certain aspects of
copyright and related rights in the information society. Other
EU directives in this field that are relevant in the online
environment are those relating to the protection of
software17and databases18.

Directive 2001/29/EC harmonisesthe rights of authors and
neighbouring rightholders19which are essential for the
transmission of digital copies of works (e.g. an e-book) and
other protected subject matter (e.g. a record in a MP3 format)
over the internet or similar digital networks.

The most relevant rights for digital transmissions are the
reproduction right, i.e. the right to authorise or prohibitthe
making of copies20, (notably relevant at the start of the
transmission-e.g. the uploading of a digital copy of a work to
a server inview of making it available-and at the users'
end-e.g. when a user downloads a digital copy of a work) and
the communication to the public/making available right, i.e.
the rights to authorise or prohibit the dissemination of the
works in digital networks21. These rights are intrinsically
linked in digital transmissions and both need to be cleared.

The act of "making available"

Directive 2001/29/EC specifies neitherwhatis covered by the
making available right (e.g. the upload, theaccessibility by
the public, the actual reception by the public) norwherethe act
of "making available" takes place. This does not raise questions
if the act is limited to a single territory. Questions arise
however when the transmission covers several territories and
rights need to be cleared (does the act of "making available"
happen in the country of the upload only? in each of the
countries where the content is potentially accessible? in each
of the countries where the content is effectively accessed?).
Themostrecent case law of the Court of Justice of the European
Union (CJEU) suggests that a relevant criterion is the
"targeting" of a certain Member State's public22. According to
this approachthe copyright-relevant act (which has to be
licensed) occurs at least in those countries which are
"targeted" by the online service provider. A service provider
"targets" a group of customers residing in a specific country
when it directs its activity tothat group, e.g. via
advertisement, promotions, a language or a currency
specifically targeted at that group.

1.Is the scope of the"making available"right in cross-border
situations- i.e.when content is disseminated across
borders-sufficiently clear?

YES

NO-Please explain how this could be clarified and what type of
clarification would be required (e.g. as in "targeting"
approach explained above, as in "country of origin" approach23)

The internet works globally, and if a rights holder makes
available his work across this distribution network then it is
uploaded with an International target market in mind. They may
be situated in the country of origin or not where the articles
are manufactured or produced.

Although articles may be uploaded, each territory should have
respective payment structures in place that determines the
scale of licence payment and the rights holders option to
negotiate the key distributors in each territory(Worldwide
and/or specified)pursuant to fair trading.

The country of origin becomes less important in this landscape
of cross border communication and business . That said, in
consideration that collecting societies, rights holders
privilege and legal enforcement potential are inplace,
connected to all concerned within a single market,

(in collaboration with signatories of the Berne Convention),
working towards mutual aims and beneficial development for the
greater public good. Not at the expense of the source creators
and rightsholders.

The rights holder or license representative should be able to
target his market across borders, singly or in group clusters,
in respect to full transparency. They should be empowered with
full information by the respective "targeting" uploadengine
such as Google with full disclosure.

The rights holder can then decide whether to allow upload to a
platform such as the non-commercial 'selfie' site and/or give
up their rights for free and/or for PR purposes solely and/or
restrict the Artwork or visual content for selective exhibition
elsewhere or only in a Gallery.

Notwithstanding, the rights holders should be given the fair
opportunity not to be deceived by uploading to one, who then
disseminates across bordersfor profit, without fair recompense
to the original source rights holder, without any legal
curtailment or regulation.

Not unlike horse thieves subcontracting across borders.

In  my opinion, all worksshould be first digitally encrypted by
a standardized invisible watermark and/or visual code that is
registered by the chosen collecting society and/or by the
individual rights holders before considering any content
dissemination across networked borders.

(DACS as a collecting society for Artists are not yet positioned
to do this other than by Artists credited name).

The  works and respective rights could then be tracked and
policed by consent in full transparency. All rights holders and
their collectingsocieties will then not be excluded from a
percentage of profits legally due them.

NO OPINION

1.[In particular if you are a right holder:]Could a
clarification of the territorial scope of the "making
available"right have an effect on the recognition ofyour rights
(e.g. whether you are considered to be

an author or not, whether you are considered to have transferred
your rights or not), on your remuneration, or on the enforcement
of rights (including the availability of injunctive relief24)?

YES-Please explain how such potential effects could be addressed

Fair remuneration needs to be decided at the source of the
proposed transference of rights, by contractual license
agreement, not when exploitationis discovered and injunctive
relief is reluctantly required from a possible so called
audacious "innocent infringer." The rights holder is then in
position to licence and not before.

Clarification of the territorial scope also needs to be mutually
agreed before exploitation (within the licence agreement),
otherwise it could harm any recognition of rights by further
"customized" appropriation by users ignorant of rights.
(Legislation needs to direct copyright education by continued
enforcement and support of it).

if a rights holder "makes available" their work innocently under
false understanding (which circumvents the rightful deciders of
territorial scope), then it could be misconstrued as possibly
fraudulent or contractually unenforceable.

Furthermore , it could also be detrimental to the rights holders
financial speculation, business and opportunity to target his
market.

The fact that crucial information may be withheld from the
rights holder, regarding the actual territorial scope of
transmission intended and agreed by an honorable license
agreement between parties unknown, could obstruct the
possibility of injunctive relief. it could take a rights
holdersometime to acquire the relevant information

of the parties concerned and injunctive relief needs particular
and quick action to be effective. If a rights holder cannot
find out who is behind a website profile selling without a
licence, injunctive relief has no enforceability, especially
across borders territories and/or countries.

If then in default, the licensee may then be in breach of
protected reproduction rights. The only legal recourse then may
be far beyond any injunctive relief. The rights holder may then
have to endure losing recognition of his rights until evidence
is brought to light to substantiate the licensee's named
infringement,

so as to obtain an equitable hearing. Notwithstanding the
financial burden to do so, whilst possibly slandered as a
copyright troll to protect their legal rights of property.
Might is not always right.

It is common sense and realistic for a rights holder to expect
proper remuneration for any assignment of copyright and/or for
a blanket licence, by front end percentage calculation and
agreement. Not when the cart. horse and goods have beenstolen,
sold, distributed and franchised to unknown third parties..

NO

NO OPINION

Two rights involved in a single act of exploitation

Each act of transmission indigitalnetworks entails (in the
current state of technology and law) several reproductions.
This means that there are two rights that apply to digital
transmissions: the reproduction right and the making available
right. This may complicate the licensing of works for online
use notably when the two rights are held by
differentpersons/entities.

1.[Inparticular if you a service provider or a right
holder:]Does the application of two rights to a single act of
economic exploitation in the online environment (e.g. a
download) create problems for you?

YES-Please explain what type of measures would be needed in
order to address such problems (e.g. facilitation of joint
licences when the rights are in different hands, legislation to
achieve the "bundling of rights")

Joint licensing is crucial incopyright so that the broadcaster
and/ordigitaldistributor obtains permissions, assignments from
one source as the rights holder and/or from the agreed legal
representative and/or collecting society.

The rights holder reproduction right can only becontrolled by
digital encryption of a visual code that emulates (by pixel
construction), that which by comparison recognizes the
construction of a music track by title and composition. (This
could be a new invention in the making by Eu Consultation and
future direction?)

The development of various codes for new apps to facilitate the
interpretation of encrypteddatafordigitalreproduction
transmission and embedded licence agreements will be configured
in the near future for alldigitalcopies and transactions, as in
the fashion industry by the visual representative design.

Transmissions indigitalnetworks could then be tracked
exponentially.

NO

NO OPINION

Linking and browsing

Hyperlinksare references to data thatlead a user from one
location in the Internet to another. They are indispensable for
the functioning of the Internet as a network. Several cases are
pending before the CJEU25in which the question has been raised
whether the provision of a clickable linkconstitutes an act of
communication to the public/making available to the public
subject to the authorisation of the rightholder.

A user browsing the internet (e.g. viewing a web-page) regularly
creates temporary copies of works and other subject-matter
protected under copyright on the screen and in the 'cache'
memory of his computer. A question has been referred to the
CJEU26as to whether such copies are always covered by the
mandatory exception for temporary acts of reproduction provided
for in Article5(1)of Directive 2001/29/EC.

1.Should the provision ofa hyperlink leading to a work or other
subject matter protected under copyright, either in general or
under specific circumstances, be subject to the authorisation
of the rightholder?

YES-Please explain whether you consider this to be the case in
general, or under specific circumstances, and why

A clickable link is a connectionand therefor constitutes an act
of communication which circumvents possible allowances by the
rights holder of selective copies. (Unless fornon-commercial
use such as for education purposes, personal investigation or
research),

All branches of hyperlinked copies (not typed reference links in
the browser), should be extended the protection of copyright as
it is a vehicle mechanism by which to create derivatives. A
copy is a copy whatever the distribution means.

A hyperlink to buy a product as in information, a book, or a
commercial transaction (that the rights holder verifies by
contractual licence agreement), could benefit the copyright
owner by way of percentage pay per click, negotiated within the
contractual agreement. These charges may become morepopular or
evident in the near future once the collecting societies, apps,
software and network are collectively configured.

Invasion into the "Cache" memory of a users computer is most
unpopular. Users believe they are being spied upon which is
contrary to the compliant understanding of what the internet is
for.

This works contrary to good public relations in respect to a
user viewing for personal use and is not a "communication' but
possibly an "entrapment' reproduction by default into the users
territory and respected rights by the associative company cache.

Unless the user gains profit by appropriation, manufacture
and/or distribution, then the "curious" user surfing the net,
being made aware of hyperlinks should not be charged for such
reproductions for personal use.

The associative network hyperlinks are the very stuff that makes
the internet what it is and attractive to users. It has been led
by market research in order to obtain the user preferences in
order to target and tempt users directly with advertising and
products.

The internet is a virtual communication of information as an
archive tool for research and function. To get a flight, buy a
product under rights holder licence etc

If used for any form of entertainmentoutside PR and/or self
publicity , the user pays for services. To download music or a
film.

The browser is similar to a shop window. The customer has a
right to enter and view the products on offer. Only if he buys,
the transaction becomes a commercial one and the rights holders
then have option to acquire and/or negotiate their fees and
minimal collecting incentives for all concerned within the
transaction to benefit

NO-Please explain whether you consider this to be the case in
general, or under specific circumstances, and why (e.g. because
it does not amount to an act of communication to the public-or
to a new public, or because it should be covered by a copyright
exception)

NO OPINION

1.Should the viewing ofa web-page where this implies the
temporary reproduction of a work or other subject matter
protected under copyright on the screen and in the cache memory
of the user's computer, either in general or under specific
circumstances, be subject to the authorisation of the
rightholder?

YES-Please explain whether you consider this to be the case in
general, or under specific circumstances, and why

The viewing person is not liable for, or party to any agreements
between the web-page owner and the rights holder in the first
instance. They are innocent in their viewing, mostly with the
misunderstanding that the material, information, visual content
and /or Art is cleared for broadcast and distribution.

The interactivity of the web-page into the cache of the
recipient viewer should benefit the rights holder by way of a
small royalty from the web-page owner if some economic benefit
is obtained.

Registered digital encryption by the respective collecting
societies, could allow online tracking with codes related tothe
specific works and rights.

Harmonization for rights holders by future intelligent search
engines could help separate from what constitutes a
reproduction, an unauthorized copy, a financial transaction and
so forth.

The consensus within the creative industries and visual arts
fields (outside short filmmakers, fashion students and
"amateur" self promoters etc)seems to be a collective negative
mood in regards to copyright protection. The rumour seems to
illustrate a reluctance to "put anything on the net if you
value your copyright"

A rights holder should have the legal right to negotiate fair
use allowance or gain other benefit of attracting a user to the
licensee's website (or window). The rights holder could receive
a percentage of pay per click from the website user if
attracting over a certain stipulated amount of traffic.

Many unseen works could be then released, once the collecting
infrastructure for visual artists is in place and protected by
legal boundaries. The internet is an infinite virtual landscape
and copyright is a stake of property. However the business of
transactions does not change only in respect that if users
and/or buyers feel they

are being ripped off, theywill withdraw their purchase. This is
contrary to the old school business philosophy of make a quick
buck whatever the consequences as integrity replaces corporate
greed.

NO-Please explain whether you consider this to be the case in
general, or under specific circumstances, and why (e.g. because
it is or should be covered by a copyright exception)

NO OPINION

Download to own digital content

Digital content is increasingly being bought via digital
transmission (e.g. download to own). Questions arise as to the
possibility for users to dispose of the files they buy in this
manner (e.g. by selling them or by giving them as a gift). The
principle of EU exhaustion of the distribution right applies in
the case of the distribution of physical copies (e.g. when a
tangible article such as a CD or a book, etc. is sold, the
right holder cannot prevent the further distribution of that
tangible article)27. The issue that arises here is whether this
principle can also be applied in the case of an act of
transmission equivalent in its effect to distribution (i.e.
where the buyer acquires the property of the copy)28. This
raises difficult questions, notably relating to the practical
application of such an approach (how to avoid re-sellers
keeping and using a copy of a work after they have "re-sold"
it-this is often referred to as the "forward and delete"
question) as well as to the economic implications of the
creation of a second-hand market of copies of perfect quality
that never deteriorate (in contrast to the second-hand market
for physical goods).

1.[Inparticular if you are an end user/consumer:]Have you faced
restrictions when trying to resell digital files that you have
purchased (e.g. mp3 file, e-book)?

YES-Please explain by giving examples

Any digital copy can be investigated, tracked and dated,
although the work entailed is extremely tiresome.

A rights holder and /or contentproducer should not be entrapped
in chasing endless copies even further by customization. Their
energy is best suited not in endless legality but in the
creation of "desirability"

If a buyer seeks to sell a one off to a friend then it is of
value to be bought.

If the provenance of the work is unique, then word of mouth
could lead to further economic generation for all concerned.

One cannot transmit without distribution, and if there is
nothing to distribute, the space lies empty. A cinema needsa
film to transmit but needs to pay the rights holder or film
company before it can do so.

In  my view the buyer obtains the copy but not the rights to
reproduce for commercial gain or by "pirating"

In the physical analogue world,once a record is released and
collected by hard copy, the value of the origination can
escalate by the value invested on it by collectors. To attempt
to protect this area of personal re-use (once released) is not
viable.

However with the education ofnext generations to code, and the
new apps they invent, in public awareness of copyright
legality, I foresee all digital content will be regulated.

I. In my case, digital copies in object similarity have been
appropriated from infringers websites, then displayed to
attract other buyers with copies in multiple "infinite"
editions.

NO

NO OPINION

1.[In particular if you are a right holder or a service
provider:] What would betheconsequences of providing a legal
framework enablingtheresale of previously purchased digital
content? Please specify per market (type of content) concerned.

[Open question]

Restricted secondary use of digital copies may be difficult to
enforce if not carried out across the net. Ebay is a case in
point.

However if an Artist discovers over100copies of his album being
sold there, he should be entitled to enquire from whom these
were obtained. The legal framework could stop say more
than10copies being sold per individual if not a classic record.

ifa work is protected by rights and is of intrinsic value to
create economic benefit, then the resale right should apply in
respect to works of Art and other decided criteria.

Someone filming a film or taking a picture of a picture, other
than for fairpersonal use is debatable, but exporting it online
for fame, by blatant appropriation without credit to the
original work is a total insult to the original filmmaker or
photographer.

This practice is now so widespread, it requires and desperately
needsa legal framework from which to institute an International
consumer education program regarding copyright, IP and
respective rights.

Registration of works and other subject matter-is it a good
idea?

Registration is not often discussed in copyright in theEUas the
existing international treaties in the area prohibit
formalities as a condition for the protection and exercise of
rights. However, this prohibition is not absolute29. Moreover a
system of registration does not need to be made compulsory or
constitute a precondition for the protection and exercise of
rights. With a longer term of protection and with the increased
opportunities thatdigitaltechnology provides for theuse of
content (including older works and works that otherwise would
not have been disseminated), the advantages and disadvantages
of a system of registration are increasingly being
considered30.

Would the creation of a registration system atEUlevelhelp in the
identification and licensing of works and other subject matter?

2.

YESNO

NO OPINION

1.What would be the possible advantages of such a system?

[Open question]

The decision for the digitalencryption and release of original
works protected by copyright, IP and other rights must be by
the rights holder. The standardization by registration of all
related works in their respective fields should not dictate
when this decision should be made.

Compulsory registration for copyright works with collecting
societies may prejudice the rights holders position but then
the rights holder(atthe least), needs to assert his copyright
for it to be fixed in time.

This a rights holder can do without registration, but exposure
on a public notice board or relevant periodical or other form
is legally sufficient to confirm/assert the rights holders
status and ownership of copyright.

However when the system ofregistration is in place, it will
create a free flow of information, materials, computerized
payment structures and release of media material gathering
payment royalties to the rights holders, as well as the
possibility of back dated license fees to clawback.

DAny exploiters of rights will then be unable to argue that they
made the proper legal investigations regarding the rights holder
as it is in plain view.

E. In my case, I chose an International magazine targeted to all
media, Art, fashion and celebrity culture to exhibit my Artifact
and fix it with copyright assertions in the 80's, as there was
no categories nor options to register it in history's timeline,
due to it's unique and "anomalous" characteristics.

1.What would be the possible disadvantages of such a system?

[Open question]

Dictation to conform original works of Art, sculptures from
within the experience of a gallery landscape into the confines
of digital display far inferior to it's intended exposure as
High Art.

For copyright identification purposes it can work but as
reference copies, so as to create a need to see and experience
the original.

The Andy Warhol Foundation by their "authentication board" have
done much good work in protectingand marketing Mr Warhol's
extensive collection across B2B online networks for consumers
delighted discovery. Merchandising copies abound of his various
images in various guises which are licensed byAWF

to third parties. Multiple editions and limited editions are
controlled by his Estate, theAWF.All generate ongoing economic
value, authenticated by the rights holderAWF.

1.What incentives for registration by rightholders could be
envisaged?

[Open question]

The opportunity for any toresearch the availability of license
assignments, copyright, IP, rights holder details for any given
work offered up to the public in the digital domain from this
time on.

The possibility for rights holders to negotiated a percentage of
profits from any intended copies and negotiate license
agreements direct.

The fair potential to obtain a livelihood from all intellectual
property as a valued economic generator..

How to improve the use and interoperability of identifiers

There are many private databases of works and other subject
matter held by producers, collective management organisations,
and institutions such as libraries, which are based to a
greater or lesser extent on the use of (more or less)
interoperable, internationally agreed 'identifiers'.
Identifiers can be compared to a reference number embedded in a
work, are specific to the sector in which they have been
developed31, and identify, variously,the work itself, the owner
or the contributor to a work or other subject matter. There are
notable examples of where industry is undertaking actions to
improve the interoperability of such identifiers and databases.
The Global Repertoire Database32should, once operational,
provide a single source of information on the ownership and
control of musical works worldwide. The Linked Content
Coalition33was established to develop building blocks for the
expression and management of rights and licensing across all
content and media types. It includes the development of a
Rights Reference Model (RRM) - a comprehensive data model for
all types of rights in all types of content. The UK Copyright
Hub34is seeking to take such identification systems a step
further, and to create a linked platform, enabling automated
licensing across different sectors.

1.What should be the role of theEUin promoting the adoption of
identifiers in the content sector, and in
promotingthedevelopment and interoperability of rights
ownership and permissions databases?

[Open question]

Copyright is asserted by creation and cannot be dictated by
those that are not legally qualified outside a Court of Law to
make comment, especially if theyare not on record to do so.
Furthermore there seem to be too many desperate and greedy
parasites across the net who know not what it is to create
value, in the first place.

It could be disadvantageous to any rights holder to be
compromised by a collective management organization and/or
institution who have no legal right to dictate what qualifies
for copyright, as potential representatives and/or for other
possible adverse interests with partners and/or third parties
that are not declared.

Permission needs to be held by the rights holders legal
representative, trust or family member as is the rights holders
legal right by legacy to direct by his will.

As in the AWF who by Mr Andy Warhol's licence distribute much of
his original Art for gallery view Internationally, as well as
selling infinite affordable multiple edition copies for public
consumption. The rest is history.

Term of protection-is it appropriate?

Works and other subject matter are protected under copyright for
alimited period of time. After the term of protection has
expired, a work falls into the public domain and can be freely
used by anyone (in accordance with the applicable national
rules onmoralrights). The Berne Convention35requires a minimum
term ofprotection of

50years after the death of the author. TheEUrules extend this
term of protection to70years after the death of the author (as
do many other countries, e.g. the US).

With regard to performers inthe music sector and phonogram
producers, the term provided for in theEUrules also extend 20
years beyond what is mandated in international agreements,
providing for a term of protection of 70 years after the first
publication. Performers and producersin the audio-visual
sector, however, do not benefit from such an extended term of
protection.

1.Are thecurrent terms of copyright protection still appropriate
in the digital environment?YES-Please explain

Yes but it needs to be amended in consideration of protecting
those on the front line who are suffering widespread
exploitation solely by online distribution networks. (My case
is in the extreme due to the simplicity of construction and
it's easy appropriation as a lean product and attractive object
symbol.

This is fine. it could be reduced to 50 on the condition that an
Artist should not have to die to then be boosted into attached
value and fame.

Their relations should benefitmaterially from their Ancestor's
chattels of provenance in respect to their popularity, marketed
or not.

The  rights holders should be able to protect their works, name
and integrity during their own lifetime and sometime reasonably
beyond. This obviously relates to copies and not original unique
limited edition works.

It may take a rights holder a lifetime to not only create his
works, and if he is forced to constantly chase online shadows
to protect his rights, then the public are further robbed
offurther enjoyment and benefit.

Hadmany innovators, Artist's and pioneers been respected proper
support in their lifetime, then many businesses could not have
enriched themselves from their unique inventions.

To create a unique exceptionalwork or invention, is hard enough
to do let alone further suffering to protect it in one's own
lifetime.

Great works could be subsequently stunted from release by the
creators and rights holders in facing such unregulated
copyright infringement.

Copyright could be improved, to stop online business from
generating business based on digital copies of an object symbol
/Artifact, (displayed on their website to secure orders),
without having any licence or copyright for the object symbol/
Artifact but as attractive incentive to buy.

J. There could be copyright amendments and//or directions for
fast track judicial review and/or consideration by online legal
intermediaries, to enforce authentic rights holder protection
against widespread exploitation by opportunist websites selling
"counterfeit" and "pirated" copies.

K. At the last count there were4,400,000digital copies displayed
in Google on websites retailing multiple editions of my Artifact
without licence but implied authorization.

L. The Police and/or Customs and excise are reluctant to be
involved in prosecuting online infringers due to the complexity
of effective enforcement without server compliance. Actual
physical copies of the object or Artifact can be seized and
destroyed bythem, if found in large quantities.

M. However, in this case, the infringers purely retail from
their online websites but order from exporting countries who
send the product copies directly to countries internationally.
This

NO-Please explain if they should be longer or shorter

NO OPINION

I.Limitations and exceptions in the Single Market

Limitations and exceptions to copyright and related rights
enable the use of works and other protected subject- matter,
without obtaining authorisation from the rightholders, for
certain purposes and to a certain extent (for instance the use
for illustration purposes of an extract from a novel by a
teacher in a literature class). AtEUlevel they are established
in a number of copyright directives, most notably Directive
2001/29/EC36.

Exceptions and limitations in the national andEUcopyright laws
have to respect international law37. In accordance with
international obligations, theEUacquis requires that
limitationsand exceptions can only be applied in certain
special cases which do not conflict with a normal exploitation
of the work or other subject matter and do not unreasonably
prejudice the legitimate interest of the rightholders.

Whereas the catalogue of limitations and exceptions included in
EU law is exhaustive (no other exceptions can be applied to the
rights harmonised at EU level)38, these limitations and
exceptions are often optional39, in the sense that Member
States are free to reflect in national legislation as many or
as few of them as they wish. Moreover, the

formulationofcertainof the limitations and exceptions is general
enough to give significant flexibility to the Member States as
to how, and to what extent, to implement them (if they decide
todo so). Finally, it is worth noting that not all of the
limitations and exceptions included in the EU legal framework
for copyright are of equivalent significance in policy terms
and in terms of their potential effect on the functioning of
the Single Market.

In addition, in the same manner that the definition of the
rights is territorial (i.e. has an effect only within the
territory of the Member State), the definition of the
limitations and exceptions to the rights is territorial too (so
an act that is covered by an exception in a Member State "A" may
still require the authorisation of the rightholder once we move
to the Member State "B")40.

The cross-border effect of limitations and exceptions also
raises the question of fair compensation of rightholders. In
some instances, Member States are obliged to compensate
rightholders for the harm inflicted on them by a limitation or
exception to their rights. In other instances Member States are
not obliged, but may decide, to provide for such compensation.
If a limitation or exception triggering a mechanism of fair
compensation were to be given cross-border effect (e.g. the
books are used for illustration in an online course given by an
university in a Member State "A" and the studentsare in a Member
State "B") then there would also be a need to clarify which
national law should determine the level of that compensation
and who should pay it.

Finally, the question of flexibility and adaptability is being
raised: what is the best mechanism to ensure that theEUand
Member States' regulatory frameworks adapt when necessary
(either to clarify that certain uses are covered by an
exception or to confirm that for certain uses the authorisation
of rightholders is required)? The main question here is whether
a greater degree of flexibility can be introduced in theEUand
Member States regulatory framework while ensuring the required
legal certainty, including for the functioning of the Single
Market, and respecting the EU's international obligations.

1.Are there problemsarising from the fact that most limitations
and exceptions provided in theEUcopyright directives are
optional for the Member States?

YES-Please explain by referring to specific cases

The fact thatEUcopyright directives are optional inEUand Member
states (specifically the United Kingdom), may prejudice and
prevent any rights holder seeking any legal remedy even by
Directive 2001/29/EC to protect their rights, if appropriated
without authorization byCrown, Government, Quango and/or other

associated corporate entities. The rights holder may be so
"bullied" into submission by connected parties that even though
they may have a case in merit by object similarity, construction
and causal connection, theyare fodder for Giants.

Their right of paternity may even stripped from recognition or
assertion by horizontal exploitation across all networks,
creating a position so adverse, it is nigh impossible to get
any fair hearing and /or legal representation to present a
case.

EUcopyright directives need to be enforced by Luxembourg to have
any effect or acknowledgement in United Kingdom Courts as well
as the right to a fair hearing under Article6of the Human
Rights Act, with the resultant penalties given for disregard.

This however is way beyond any individual Artist whose copyright
has been so exploited, without right to paternity, or
recompense. This huge disadvantage needs to be rectified.

My Artifact was in fact appropriated by advertising/
marketingadvisers in the first instance as a lean merchandising
product for various campaign initiatives. These were then sold
on to their respective clients in supportive marketing
campaigns for CSR and other political objectives ad infinitum.

This simple Artifact then became the object symbol for"
awearness" which it was created to be some years earlier, even
then without the given ease and availability of Internet
distribution.

Infinite copies then sold in millions worldwide and
generatedhuge economic benefit for a New Labour Government
campaigns titled Make Poverty History, the Olympics, and even
generated over100million for a "dopepeddlar" named Lance
Armstrong as well as wrongly credited to an employee of Nike
Inc et al

This is a disgrace.

In fact i created the original plastic silicone
wristband/bracelet for infinite personal and collective
expression, which was asserted and exhibited with Mr Andy
Warhol's personal approval to say the least.

It was crafted molded and innovative. It was also re-purposed
for a BBC "Beatbullying" campaign, One/ProductRed by Bono and
seeded acrossmulti-national territories in customized and
counterfeit appropriation.

Initially by exhibition it was protected by copyright for
obvious reasons, however it could interest me what mechanism
could be triggered to allow me fair compensation, as the rights
holder, considering the magnanimous level of exploitation now
Worldwide, and obstruction to obtain a fair hearing with legal
representation.

A copy was even projected onto the United Nations building and
campaigns initiated by the Population Services International
for Aids-the original wristbands first engraved Artistic and
social expression.

H. The questionis, what regulatory frameworkis there to protect
me as a copyright rights holder against such exploitation and
obstruction?

NO - Please explain

NO OPINION

1.Shouldsome/all of the exceptions be made mandatory and, if so,
is there a need for a higher level ofharmonisationofsuch
exceptions?

YES-Please explain by referring to specific cases

...A. There is an obvious need forharmonisationat a higher level
and the mandatory respect to rights holders as the golden goose
that lay the eggs need protection from collective market abuse.

NO - Please explain

NO OPINION

1.Shouldany new limitations and exceptions be added to or
removed from the existing catalogue? Please explain by
referring to specific cases.

[Open question]

My case needs a proper hearingas a legal precedent is needed to
draw a line against such bullish exploitation.

Many cases regarding infringement of right holders are not
brought to Court as the costs, corporate client conflicts and
effort to do so, is beyond one's endurance.

1.Independently from the questions above, is there a need to
provide for a greater degree of flexibility in theEUregulatory
framework for limitations and exceptions?

YES - Please explain why

A. Only in respect to allowinga fair equitable hearing for
rights holders.

NO - Please explain why

NO OPINION

1.If yes, what would be the best approach to provide for
flexibility? (e.g. interpretation by national courts and the
ECJ, periodic revisions of the directives,interpretations by
the Commission, built-in flexibility, e.g. in the form of a
fair-use or fair dealing provision/open norm, etc.)? Please
explain indicating what would betherelative advantages and
disadvantages of such an approach as well as its possible
effects on the functioning of the Internal Market.

[Open question]

A, Yes enforced interpretation by National Courts and ECJ could
remedy somewhat robber barons from abusing legal rights in the
guise of education and/ or charity to avoid rights holders
remuneration due, in collaboration in the solely for profit

1.Does the territoriality of limitations and exceptions, in your
experience, constitute a problem?

YES-Please explain why and specify which exceptions you are
referring to

In my experience, it is a problem to me as a Citizen and
possible reluctant lip, who faces formidable opposition by
bodies corporate who have legal armies under their tentacles of
influence to deny any fair hearing by"audacious" claims.

The process within civil justice rules is time consuming and
long winded.

Is it not hard enough that a rights holder is forced to endure
the complications of copyright enforcement, but that also the
existence of the numerous territories allow the "bandits" to
crossborders at the click of a mouse, without any regulation.

As an innovative creator forced to become almost a paralegal
with a high learning legal curve (against experts hellbent on
striking any claim out), the odds are stacked against one.
Hence intervention from the Commission is required in
considering this actual predicament of

an Artist and rights holder attempting to protect his copyright
and livelihood.

NO - Please explain why and specify which exceptions you are
referring to

NO OPINION

1.In the event that limitations and exceptions established at
national level were to have cross-border effect, how should the
question of "fair compensation"be addressed, when such
compensation is part of the exception? (e.g. who pays whom,
where?)

[Open question]

The  primary infringers are ordered by the Commission to pay
fair compensation, on review of the infringers account of
profits considering the integrity of usage. if say the charity
generated a budget to "help heroes" or for "breast cancer"

Licence backdate is then reasonably assessed for compensation as
well as percentage royalties set for past and ongoing usage.
Paternity and credit becomes another issue unless by
exploitation the integrity of the rights have been grossly
compromised , as with Lance Armstrong.

However the charities and 'or commission could be obliged to
reveal the instigators of the campaign so damages can be
directed appropriately.

C. Limitations and exceptionsto copyright and related rights
enable the use of works and other protected subject-matter,
without obtaining authorisation from the rightsholder.

This could be misconstrued as creating the environment in which
to unbalance rights holders legal rightof copyright.

Access to content in libraries and archives

Directive 2001/29/EC enables Member States to reflect in their
national law a range of limitations and exceptions for the
benefit of publicly accessible libraries, educational
establishments and museums, as well as archives. If
implemented, these exceptions allow acts of preservation and
archiving41and enable on-site consultation of the works and
other subject matter in the collections of such institutions42.
The public lending (under an exception or limitation) by these
establishments of physical copies of works and other subject
matter is governed by the Rental and Lending Directive43.

Questions arise as to whether the current framework continues to
achieve the objectives envisaged or whether it needs to be
clarified or updated to cover use in digital networks. At the
same time, questions arise as to the effect of such a possible
expansion on the normal exploitation of works and other subject
matter and as to the prejudice this may cause to rightholders.
The role of licensing and possible framework agreements between
different stakeholders also needs to be considered here.

Preservation and archiving

The preservation of the copiesof works or other subject-matter
held in the collections of cultural establishments (e.g. books,
records, or films)-the restoration or replacement of works, the
copying of fragile works-may involve the creation of another
copy/ies of these works or other subject matter. Most Member
States provide for an exception in their national laws allowing
for the making of such preservation copies. The scope of the
exception differs from Member State to Member State (as regards
the type of beneficiary establishments, the types of

works/subject-matter covered by the exception, the mode of
copying and the number of reproductions that a beneficiary
establishment may make). Also, the current legal status of new
types of preservation activities (e.g. harvesting and archiving
publicly available web content) is often uncertain.

1.(a)[In particular if you are an institutional user:]Have you
experienced specificproblems when trying to use an exception to
preserve and archive specific works or other subject matter in
your collection?

(b)[In particular if you are a right holder:]Have you
experienced problems with the use by libraries, educational
establishments,museum or archives of the preservation
exception?

YES - Please explain, by MemberState,sector, and the type of use
in question.

Archiving is good as it allows databases to grow and is a hub
for would be infringers to search details of rights holdersand
obtain their contact details.

In my case my exhibited Artifact and artwork was archived within
the periodical in the Sackler Center, V&A, The Arts Council in
London and the Library of Congress US, in the event that this
most unfortunate predicament occurred.

CI agree with exception in national law to make a preservation
copy at no charge as public reference material

?/

NO

NO OPINION

1.If there are problems, how would they best be solved?

[Open question]

A Information is the new currencyby which the internet operates.
Harvesting of this information is lucrative and beneficial to
cross border relations and for mutual economic benefit.

Territories outside educational archive purposes need to be
regulated but as a rights holderican see no problem in granting
a licence to publicly accessible libraries, educational
establishments and museums, as well as archives

However if my original Artifact is copied as a merchandising
product to be sold in their gift shops as a
promotionalproduct,iwould expect a change of licence and/or
contract.

1.If your view is that a legislative solution is needed, what
would be its main elements? Which activities of the beneficiary
institutions should be covered and under which conditions?

[Open question]

1.If your view is that a different solution is needed, what
would it be?

[Open question]

Off-premises access to library collections

Directive 2001/29/EC provides an exception for the consultation
of works and other subject-matter (consulting an e-book,
watching a documentary) via dedicated terminals on the premises
of such establishments for the purpose of research and private
study. The online consultation of works and other
subject-matter remotely (i.e. when the library user is not on
the premises of the library) requires authorisation and is
generally addressed in agreements between
universities/libraries and publishers. Some argue that the law
rather than agreementsshould provide for the possibility to,
and the conditions for, granting online access to collections.

1.(a)[Inparticular if you are an institutional user:]Have you
experienced specificproblems when trying to negotiate
agreements with rights holders that enable you to provide
remote access, including across borders, to your collections
(or parts thereof) for purposes of research and private study?

(b)[In particular if you are an end user/consumer:]Have you
experienced specific problems when trying to consult, including
across borders, works and other subject-matter held in the
collections of institutions such as universities and national
libraries when you are not on the premises of the institutions
in question?

(c)[Inparticular if you are a right holder:]Have you negotiated
agreements with institutional users that enable those
institutions to provide remote access, including across
borders, to the works or other subject-matter in their
collections, for purposes of research and private study?

[Open question]ree

1.If there are problems, how would they best be solved?

[Open question]

1.If your view is that a legislativesolution is needed, what
would be its main elements? Which activities of the beneficiary
institutions should be covered and under which conditions?

[Open question]...

A The rights holder could formallybe requested in writing
whether they want to comply with the terms of the library or
institution, and if so give up their rights in the respective
field and/or for third use and no other.

B. The copy stops with the viewer in the library

1.  If your view isthat a different solution is needed, what
would it be?

[Open question]

A.By way of accounting the institutuiions should declare any
respective earnings for the downloading and viewing of any
selected works for reinvestment into their collections and
upkeep. The accesibility of materials allowed by rights holders
to access these can help towards finance this aim.

E - lending

Traditionally, public librarieshave loaned physical copies of
works (i.e. books, sometimes also CDs and DVDs) to their users.
Recent technological developments have made it technically
possible for libraries to provide users with temporary access
to digital content, such as e-books, music or films via
networks. Under the current legal framework, libraries need to
obtain the authorisation of the rights holders to organise such
e-lending activities. In various Member States, publishers and
libraries are currently experimenting with different business
models for the making available of works online, including
direct supply of e-books to libraries by publishers or bundling
by aggregators.

1.(a)[Inparticular if you are a library:]Have you experienced
specific problems when trying to negotiate agreements to enable
the electronic lending (e-lending), including across borders, of
books or other materials held in your collection?

[In particular if you are an end user/consumer:]Have you
experienced specificproblems when trying to borrow books or
other materials electronically (e-lending), including across
borders, from institutions such as public libraries?

[In particular if you are a right holder:]Have you negotiated
agreements with libraries to enable them to lend books or other
materials electronically, including across borders?

YES-Please explain with specific examples

A. Only if copies of my Artifact were sold by
digital3Dimprinting wouldiexpect a licence for my rights and/or
it was sold inthe museum and/or library gift shop.

NO OPINION

1.If thereare problems, how would they best be solved?[Open
question]

The following two questions are relevant both to this point
(n03)and the previous one (n02).

1.[In particular if you are aninstitutional user:]What
differences do you see in the management of physical and online
collections, including providing access to your subscribers?
What problems have you encountered?

[Open question]

1.[Inparticular if you are a right holder:]What difference do
you see between libraries' traditional activities such as
on-premises consultation orpubliclending and activities such as
off-premises (online, at a distance) consultation and e-lending?
What problems have you encountered?

[Open question]

Mass digitisation

The term "mass digitisation" is normally used to refer to
efforts by institutions such as libraries and archives to
digitise (e.g. scan) the entire content or part of their
collections with an objective to preserve thesecollections and,
normally, to make them available to the public. Examples are
efforts by libraries to digitise novels form the early part of
the 20thcentury or whole collections of pictures of historical
value. This matter has been partly addressed at theEUlevel by
the2011Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) on key principles on
the digitisation and making available of out of commerce works
(i.e. works which are no longerfound in the normal channels of
commerce), which is aiming to facilitate mass digitisation
efforts (for books and learned journals) on the basis of
licence agreements between libraries and similar cultural
institutions on the one hand and the collecting societies
representing authors and publishers on the other44. Provided
the required funding is ensured (digitisation projects are
extremely expensive), the result of this MoU should be that
books that are currently to be found only in the archives of,
for instance, libraries will be digitised and made available
online to everyone. The MoU is based on voluntary licences
(granted by Collective Management Organisations on the basis of
the mandates they receive from authors and publishers). Some
Member States may need to enact legislation to ensure the
largest possible effect of such licences (e.g. by establishing
in legislation a presumption of representation of a collecting
society or the recognition of an "extended effect" to the
licences granted)45.

1.[Inparticular if you are an institutional user, engaging or
wanting to engage in mass digitisationprojects, a right holder,
a collective management organisation:]Would it be necessary in
your country to enact legislation to ensure that the results of
the2011MoU(i.e.the agreements concluded between libraries and
collecting societies) have a cross-border effect so that out of
commerce works can be accessed across theEU?

YES - Please explain why and how it could best be achieved

.„A. Out of commerce workssuch as orphan works could pay any
management outlay and costly digital processes, as they are
owned by the cultural institutions such as the British library
who distribute copies of those works across the internet and
for investigative research from their respective archives.

NO - Please explain

NO OPINION

1.Would it benecessary to develop mechanisms, beyond those
already agreed for other types of content (e.g. for audio- or
audio-visual collections, broadcasters' archives)?

YES - Please explain

A. Again mechanism need to be developed to hinder derogatory
re-edits of audio visual works by bedroom online broadcasters
who piggy back off the end of creators original source material
beyond parody and fair use.

The World WideWebas a retail, distribution and archive network
needs to consider the "parasitical mindset" of user surfers,
bloggers and data mining agents,who declare copyright for their
own derivative works composed of others original compositions
protected by copyright.

It may be also be the responsibility of the server providers, to
inform and educate their users of the requirement of respected
rights and not audacious or ignorant acquisition. Specifically,
VDJ's and/or self promotional editors who are not stakeholders
in creating the source material

attracting and protected by rights.

NO-Please explain

NO OPINIONTeaching

Directive 2001/29/EC46enables Member States to implement in
their national legislation limitations and exceptions for the
purpose of illustration for non-commercial teaching. Such
exceptions would typically allow a teacher to use parts of or
full works to illustrate his course, e.g. by distributing
copies of fragments of a book or of newspaper articles in the
classroom or by showing protected content on a smart board
without having to obtain authorisation from the right holders.
The open formulation of this (optional) provision allows for
rather different implementation at Member States level. The
implementation of the exception differs from Member State to
Member State, with several Member States providing instead a
framework for the licensing of content for certain educational
uses. Some argue that the law should provide for better
possibilities for distance learning and study at home.

1.(a)[Inparticular if you are an end user/consumer or an
institutional user:]Have you experienced specific problems when
trying to use works or other subject-matter for illustration for
teaching, including across borders?

(b)[In particular if you are a right holder:]Have you
experienced specific problems resulting from the way in which
works or other subject-matter are used for illustration for
teaching, including across borders?

YES-Please explain

My Artifact was used as an object symbol by the BBC for the
"beatBullying Campaign fronted by Bono for education purposes,
without licence and/or credit as the originator of the
"awearness" wristband as the attractive merchandising device to
unify this so called "education" campaign initiative.

In fact all they did was whitewash over the original and sold in
excess of500, 000without proper credit and/or the right of
inspiration and/or paternity. It was awarded for it's
innovation when in fact the campaign was initiated secondary to
appropriating my Artifact as object symbol from which

the CSR and PR benefits were obviously centered around. Again
the campaign needed something to sell.

School campaign initiatives were spun out on the back end of the
original Artifact, (absorbed previously by exhibitionof my
Artifact), which distanced the original from fair recognition
by multiple limited editions and subsequent exploitation.

This was most disadvantageousto my rights and fair opportunity
to allow permissions for educational purposes as how Art and an
Artifact by design can change the World.

NO

NO OPINION

1.If thereare problems, how would they best be solved?[Open
question]

1.What mechanisms exist in the market place to facilitate the
use of content for illustration for teaching purposes? How
successful are they?

[Open question]

1.If your view is that a legislativesolution is needed, what
would be its main elements? Which activities of the beneficiary
institutions should be covered and under what conditions?

[Open question]

1.If your view is that a different solution is needed, what
would it be?

[Open question]

Research

Directive 2001/29/EC47enables Member States to choose whether to
implement in their national laws a limitation for the purpose of
non-commercial scientific research. The open formulation of this
(optional) provision allows for rather different implementations
at Member States level.

1.(a)[Inparticular if you are an end user/consumer or an
institutional user:]Have you experienced specificproblems when
trying to use works or other subject matter in the context of
research projects/activities, including across borders?

(b)[In particular if you are a right holder:]Have you
experienced specificproblems resulting from the way in which
works or other subject-matter are used in the context of
research projects/activities, including across borders?

YES - Please explain

NO

NO OPINION

1.If there are problems, how would they best be solved?

[Open question]

1.Whatmechanisms exist in the Member States to facilitate the
use of content for research purposes? How successful are they?

[Open question]

Disabilities

Directive 2001/29/EC48provides for an exception/limitationfor
the benefit of people with a disability. The open formulation
of this (optional) provision allows for rather different
implementations at Member States level. AtEUand international
level projectshave been launched to increase the accessibility
of works and other subject-matter for persons with disabilities
(notably by increasing the number of works published in special
formats and facilitating their distribution across the European
Union)49.

TheMarrakesh Treaty50has been adopted to facilitate access to
published works for persons who are blind, visually impaired,
or otherwise print disabled. The Treaty creates a mandatory
exception to copyright that allows organisations for the blind
to produce, distribute and make available accessible format
copies to visually impaired persons without the authorisation
of the rightholders. TheEUand its Member States have started
work to sign and

ratify the Treaty. This may require the adoption of certain
provisions atEUlevel (e.g. to ensure the possibility to
exchange accessible format copies across borders).

1.(a)[Inparticular if you are a person with a disability or an
organisation representing persons withdisabilities:]Have you
experienced problems with accessibility to content, including
across borders, arising from Member States' implementation of
this exception?

[In particular if you are an organisation providing services for
persons with disabilities:]Have you experienced problems when
distributing/communicating works published in special formats
across theEU?

[In particular if you are a right holder:]Have you experienced
specificproblems resulting from the application of limitations
or exceptions allowing for the distribution/communication of
works published in special formats, including across borders?

YES-Please explain by giving examples

One of the reasons i createdmy Artifact with embossed and
de-embossed engraved communication, was so that blind people
could also benefit from the social interplay of the Artifact.

As an Artist working in mixed media,iam incensed by any
prejudice that people with disabilitiesface when traversing the
World WideWeband /or in public spheres.

It is for this reason thaticreated my Artifact, in the first
place, in order to overcome by "awearness" any exclusion, any
separatism from healthy communicative life, regardless of one's
disability.

The  first Artistic expression was for AIDS in1982,then STD's,
Prejudice, Racism, Cancer ad infinitum in multiple "infinite"
limited editions, before it was appropriated for
industrialization as merchandising product and distributed asa
lean product.

It is my belief that those with disabilities of body or mind,
should have special formats to consider their disabilities in a
physical World and online, so as to make their lives more
bearable by social interaction.

NO

NO OPINION

1.If there are problems, what could be done to improve
accessibility?

[Open question]

1.What mechanisms exist in the market place to facilitate
accessibility to content? How successful are they?

[Open question]

Text and data mining

Text and data mining/content mining/data analytics51are
different terms used to describe increasingly important
techniques used in particular by researchers for the
exploration of vast amounts of existing texts and data (e.g.,
journals, web sites, databases etc.). Through the use of
software or other automated processes, an analysis is made of
relevant texts anddatain order to obtain new insights, patterns
and trends.

The texts anddataused for mining are either freely accessible on
the internet or accessible through subscriptions to e.g.
journals and periodicals that give access to the databases of
publishers. A copy is made of the relevant texts and data (e.g.
on browser cache memories or in computers RAM memories or onto
the hard disk of a computer),prior to the actual analysis.
Normally, it is considered that to mine protected works or
other subject matter, it is necessary to obtain authorisation
from the right holders for the making of such copies unless
such authorisation can be implied (e.g. content accessible to
general public without restrictions on the internet, open
access).

Some argue that the copies required for text and data mining are
covered by the exception for temporary copies in Article5.1of
Directive 2001/29/EC. Others consider thattext and data mining
activities should not even be seen as covered by copyright.
None of this is clear, in particular since text anddatamining
does not consist only of a single method, but can be undertaken
in several different ways. Important questionsalso remain as to
whether the main problems arising in relation to this issue go
beyond copyright (i.e. beyond the necessity or not to obtain
the authorisation to use content) and relate rather to the need
to obtain "access" to content (i.e. being able touse e.g.
commercial databases).

AspecificWorking Groupwassetup on this issue in the framework of
the "Licences for Europe" stakeholder dialogue. No consensus was
reached among participating stakeholders on either the problems
to be addressed or the results. At the same time, practical
solutions to facilitate text and data mining of
subscription-based scientific content were presented by
publishers as an outcome of "Licences for Europe"52. In the
context of these discussions, other stakeholders arguedthat no
additional licences should be required to mine material to
which access has been provided through a subscription agreement
and considered that a specific exception for text and data
mining should be introduced, possibly on the basis of a
distinction between commercial and non-commercial.

1.(a)[Inparticular if you are an end user/consumer or an
institutional user:]Have you experienced obstacles, linked to
copyright, when trying to use text or data mining methods,
including across borders?

[In particular if you are a service provider:]Have you
experienced obstacles, linked to copyright, when providing
services based on text or data mining methods, including across
borders?

[Inparticular if you are a right holder:]Have you
experiencedspecific problems resulting from the use of text and
data mining in relation to copyright protected content,
including across borders?

YES - Please explain

A  databases of publishers culturalinstitutions collecting
societies ???mie protected works for no need to

obtain authorisation fromrights holder blanket pemission
openaccesto iformation reference copy inferiorquality to
orignal

dataminig not covered by copyright agree issue beyond copyright
ability to use commecial databases

There is a distinction between commercial,noncommercial and not
for profit. However they all gain benefit from presenting
something that is wanted by the user. Something that is
desired, such as an object symbol that pulls them into that
which it is attached to. These criteria are researched and
mined for unique qualities

from which researchers can benefit. The researchers and /or data
miners do not need to verify their sources but sell on the
information with their fees attached.

If for example they have discovered a nugget in a gold mine,
they naturally exploit that information to third parties
without the consent of the rights holderand or the verification
of licence acquirement. which is implied. Protected within the
protected anonymity of their source.

In research they could come across an insight by ay an Artist or
innovator in library archives, which by no inventive step is
agodsend. This informational appropriation is not traceable as
it falls within hidden contracts, but nonetheless can be
exploited in more ways than one.

Subscription should require the secondary rights for releasing
data mining information third hand if for commercial benefit.
if non -commercial then the benefit must be declared. If not
for profit, the researcher should not be credited if the author
of the source material exploited, is not.

aquirement is not bysubed work or which is

If a Museum and./or institution run as a commercial enterprise,
benefits beyond a ceiling of fair use, beyond subscription as a
commercial transaction, the cultural institution as Museum or
library must obtain the the rights and/or permissions.

They could be given withouthesitation, as a true Artist wants to
communicate his works to the greater public at large. This can
be achieved by mutual benefit and trade off between the sale of
derivative merchandise in return for exhibition of the original
works'

Specifically, if copies of the rights holders work is sold by
gift shop purchase, say a MrDamienHirst mass produced shark in
formaldyhide on a keyring, (industrially manufactured in China
to questionable standards), then this could be seen as a
variationof information mining for profit.

As all mining has a profit incentive. The stakeholders share a
percentage of profits based on the fruits of the claim and
effort to dig for it. Just because the information or data is
available by ease of internet use, does not undermine the
prospectors claim as a stake and rights holder.

if this is the case then MrDamienHirst could expect to be paid
some crumbs from the table,even though not a starving Artist.

Data mining is important for education and research but not for
the benefit of "dubious" development to target markets for
commercial corporations in an ever increasing fragmented
market. This therefor needs further consideration.

NO - Please explain

NO OPINION

1.If thereare problems, how would they best be solved?

[Open question]

1.If your view is that a legislative solution is needed, what
would be its main elements? Which activities should be covered
and under what conditions?

[Open question]

1.If your view is that a differentsolution is needed, what would
it be?

[Open question]

1.Are there otherissues, unrelated to copyright, that constitute
barriers to the use of text or data mining methods?

[Open question]

User-generated content

Technological and service developments mean that citizens can
copy, use and distribute content at little to no financial
cost. As a consequence, new types of online activities are
developing rapidly, including the making of so- called
"user-generated content". While users can create totally
original content, they can also take one or several
pre-existing works, change something in the work(s), and upload
the result on the Internet e.g. to platforms
andblogs53.User-generated content (UGC) can thus cover the
modification of pre-existing works even if the newly-
generated/"uploaded" work does not necessarily require a
creative effort and results from merely adding, subtracting or
associating some pre-existing content with other pre-existing
content. This kindof activity is not "new" as such. However,
the development of social networking and social media sites
that enable users to share content widely has vastly changed
the scale of such activities and increased the potential
economic impact for those holdingrights in the pre-existing
works. Re-use is no longer the preserve of a technically and
artistically adept elite. With the possibilities offered by the
new technologies, re-use is open to all, at no cost. This in
turn raises questions with regard to fundamental rights such
the freedom of expression and the right to property.

A specific Working Group was set up on this issue in the
framework of the "Licences for Europe" stakeholder dialogue. No
consensus was reached among participating stakeholders on
eitherthe problems to be addressed or the results or even the
definition of UGC. Nevertheless, a wide range of views were
presented as to the best way to respond to this phenomenon. One
view was to say that a new exception is needed to cover UGC, in
particularnon­commercialactivities by individuals such as
combining existing musical works with videos, sequences of
photos, etc. Another view was that no legislative change is
needed: UGC is flourishing, and licensing schemes are
increasingly available (licence schemes concluded between
rightholders and platforms as well as micro-licences concluded
between rightholders and the users generating the content. In
any event, practical solutions to easeuser­generatedcontent and
facilitate micro-licensing for small users were pledged by
rightholders across different sectors as a result of the
"Licences for Europe" discussions54.

1.(a)[Inparticular if you are an end user/consumer:]Have you
experienced problemswhen trying to use pre-existing works or
other subject matter to disseminate new content on the
Internet, including across borders?

[In particular if you are a service provider:]Have you
experienced problems when users publish/disseminate new content
based on the pre-existing works or other subject-matter through
your service, including across borders?

[In particular if you are a right holder:]Have you experienced
problems resulting from the way the users are using
pre-existing works or other subject-matter to disseminate new
content on the Internet, including across borders?

YES-Please explain by giving examples

As one of the Artistically adept elite, origination is a most
important factor. Furthermore what inspired the work needs to
beproperly credited if it is referenced piece and/or is a
respected homage. Therefor, re-use by bedroom enthusiasts to
say five friends is ok if it is a homage and the source
credited.

Anything else is pure unadulteratedopportunist parasitical
exploitation. Create your own original works should be the
message. Not de-value pre-existing ones. Those that state there
is no originality left are not creators but the flotsam and
jetsam sycophants of has been appropriation. Itdied last with
the Brit-pack.

As an Artist creating original works, one needs to be99.9%sure
that no other prior work exists, it is unique and novel so as
to become a signature work. USG needs to obtain permissions
unless it is a PR exercise for therights holder. Micro licences
are a way forward.

if it is a derogatory work, such as the US court case of Mr
Richard Prince most recently, then the technical process of
blowing up, re-framing etc it is not in my opinion an Artistic
process by origination of thought or action, or even parody,
but blatant plagiarism and opportunist appropriation of the
lowest order.

The original photographer, from whom R.P directly copied
spent5years taking the said photographs, then years now and
substantial funds to protect it. This is most inappropriate
considering that many rights holders are prevented financially
form taking on such a contentious legal case. The world awaits
the outcome.

The content creator and producer has the right, and not someone
who withoutany "sweat of brow" contribution then rides it
commercially, exploiting the content in various edited
editions. A technique cannot dictate the rights, nor an
inflated ego a person of integrity.

If users in UGC exploit in any way and.or form content from pre-
existing works and change something in that work without an
inventive step, that is copyright infringement. Notwithstanding
that digital techniques with software now allow users to tweek
beyond any recognition, the whole landscape could degenerate

as it has into pure reality celebrities andtv,conceived by
program writers some30years back. There has to be a moral cut
off point.

Licences  for Europe is a positive step forward in not only
creating a respectful boundary for rights holders but in
educating the field ofUSCof its practical application for the
benefit of all.

The rights holders should not have their copyright disrespected
as it took many years and much hardship to manifest, since
Dickens. The phenomenon of a"Wild West" "free for all"
distribution network, will eventually be regulated, hopefully
not at the expense of copyright protection by future reforms.

To build a strong house you first need to have strong
foundations. A desperate get rich quick culture of greedy
appropriation and self promotion can only bring down the house,
ifUSCfurther degenerates beyond copyright value.

NO

NO OPINION

1.(a)[Inparticular if you are an end user/consumer or a right
holder:]Have you experienced problems when trying to ensure
thatthework you have created(on thebasis of pre-existing works)
is properly identified for online use? Are proprietary systems
sufficient in this context?

(b)[In particular if you are a service provider:]Do you provide
possibilities for users that are publishing/disseminating the
works they have created (on the basis of pre-existing works)
through your service to properly identify these works for
online use?

YES - Please explain

AProprietary systems are not sufficient as in the UK, only a
proprietary air of online arrogance. DACS exist for
artists,PRSfor musicians, ACID for designers, VPL for pop
videos and the IPO (who have no right and/or qualified
authority to make comment , in regards to individual copyright
and/or protect it).

The possibilities ofnew mixed media is limitless, should the
users within the landscape open their eyes outside the box. It
takes a brave psychological leap to become a true virtual
entrepreneur, beyond possibly many users hellbent on self
aggrandizement and promotion but with little else but dervative
works.

How does one, identify one's work for online use and/or register
it online, if copies of the said work have been copied to such
an extent, that it has reached such a saturated critical mass,
so as to be common place or utilitarian. One needs effective
legal remedy to even clawback paternity even though fixed fact/

NO - Please explain

NO OPINION

1.(a)[Inparticular if you are an end user/consumer or a right
holder):]Have you experienced problemswhen trying to be
remunerated for the use of the work you have created (on the
basis of pre-existing works)?

(b)[In particular if you are a service provider:]Do you provide
remuneration schemes for users publishing/disseminating the
works they have created (on the basis of pre-existing works)
through your service?

YES - Please explain

User generated work based on online marketing campaign contain a
rights holders property, creating false credits even though pre-
existing work has asserted copyright,ip and moral rights.

Widespread misinformation by employedUSCgeeks, over horizontal
networks about the true origination of works in the Lance
Armstrong comeback campaign have stunted proper remuneration by
malicious falsehood. As Nike funded the campaign from their
creative departments,

based on lies of LA,(now history), the tide has now turned to
the possibility of the truth being heard.

Service providers need to acquireadded manpower as full time
copyright advisors and/or be qualified in copyright to consider
precedent cases, such as mine.

To  get fair remuneration one faces extreme opposition to any
proceedings. Defendants prefer to spend more on their legal
retainers than resolve amicably any settlements even in damage
limitation within CSR. It is a long haul either way.

The most vlulneabel rights holder find it extremely difficult to
issue proceedings when time is expended adducing evidence so as
to support themerits of his claim. A court hearing is the end
aim and only effective remedy to protect one's rights.

The only other solution for remuneration is to retain legal
advisors and/or insured indemnity against legal costs from the
outset, in the event one'scopyright is infringed. However the
insurance business have a long way to go in understanding IP,
copyright and related rights across theWWW.asan open check book
to spend more

In most copyright cases, that do get to court "kicking and
screaming" the outcome is usually decided by those who are
represented by formidable legal beagles. This is not the best
climate for a fair equitable hearing so as to obtain proper
remuneration. What money is obtained may be eaten up in legal
fees and costs,

so as to be not worth while(even in principle).

NO - Please explain

NO OPINION

1.If thereare problems, how would they best be solved?

[Open question]

Rights holders are weigheddown heavily, faced with the added
burden of tracking their own works without any standardized
applications in place to do so. This could be solved by
creating collecting societies that are made up purely of rights
holders such as Creative Commons and/orcontent providers
and/orUSCgroups.

Educate to minimize exploitation. The "do it-wait till someone
finds out" philosophy is on the wane as business practices need
to converge in the 21st Century and onwards.

New inventive Apps now beingcreated in colleges and universities
around the world , will encrypt and digitize from the "source of
creation" with a plug- ins to linked to intelligent search
engines, designed specifically to search data referenced within
end usage ie User Generated Content.

Encrypted reference watermark registration codes linked with
hyperlinks to the collecting societies and respective rights
holder will save much time. With a click of a mouse the
hyperlink can open reference of source material contained
within blog and/or USG.

UGC "timeline trees" with all online dissemination.will verify
rights holders and provide easy to access evidence for
presentation in court. This will save time in court and spread
the profits in fair incremental remuneration down the chain of
communication and socialstratas.

To get to the core of exploitation and/or discover thee prime
engineer, one sometimes one has to wait for the ego of self
promotion to reveal it's ugly head. Bullies can never stop
bragging about their exploits.

In  my caseifirst discovered pirated versions sold being
investigated by the Charity Commission and Trading Standards,
this then revealed widespread customization andcounterfeiting
across the net, the order sites, the retailers, the
manufacturers, the campaign initiatives, merchandising
incentives, celebrity PR and so on.

H. Away to solve this is by copyright intervention by impartial
ADR mediators that can get a reluctant influential infringer to
the table to negotiate fair remuneration.

1.If your view isthat a legislative solution is needed, what
would be its main elements? Which activities should be covered
and under what conditions?

[Open question]

A. Legislation needs to allow those rights holders to have
access to a special courts and/or copyright tribunals for
initial hearing and/or practice direction by submittal of a
summary of the case and merits. This could then satisfy Civil
Justice Rules inthe process of a reluctant application for fair
remuneration and/or royalties.

1.If your view is that a different solution is needed, what
would it be?

[Open question]

A First the weight of protectionshould be with the creators
rights holders and not the parasitical business (online) of
allowing exploitation to reach critical mass in the hope to
bury any rights holder to fair recompense, allowance to appeal
to Court by sheer bullying might.

Creativity is societies true capital for without it money could
not even exist. Transactions of value require financial
satisfaction by royalties and license, to prosper generate
income in an ever more transparent fast paced Society splitting
at the seems.

Society is communicating online and there is a quantum shift in
peoples attitudes, behavour than before which will evolve the
rightful soultions.

I.Private copying and reprography

Directive 2001/29/EC enables Member States to implementin their
national legislation exceptions or limitations to the
reproduction right for copies made for private use and
photocopying55. Levies are charges imposed at national level on
goods typically used for such purposes (blank media, recording
equipment,photocopying machines, mobile listening devices such
as mp3/mp4 players, computers, etc.) with a view to
compensating rightholders for the harm they suffer when copies
are made without their authorisation by certain categories of
persons (i.e. natural persons making copies for their private
use) or through use of certain technique (i.e. reprography). In
that context, levies are important for rightholders.

With the constant developments in digital technology, the
question arises as to whether the copying offiles by
consumers/end-users who have purchased content online-e.g. when
a person has bought an MP3 file and goes on to store multiple
copies of that file (in her computer, her tablet and her mobile
phone)-also triggers, or should trigger, the application of
private copying levies. It is argued that, in some cases, these
levies may indeed be claimed by rightholders whether or not the
licence fee paid by the service provider already covers copies
made by the end user. This approach could potentially leadto
instances of double payments whereby levies could be claimed on
top of service providers' licence fees5657.

There is also an on-going discussion as to the application or
not of levies to certain types of cloud-based services such as
personal lockers orpersonal video recorders.

1.In your view, is therea need to clarify at theEUlevel the
scope and application of the private copyingand reprography
exceptions58in the digital environment?

YES-Please explain

Levies are important for rightsholders in recompense for the
harm and distress they suffer, by reproduction of their works.

Levies can top up license fees if the service provider profits
in some way. A percentage may then be due. NO-Please explain

NO OPINION

1.Should digital copies made by end users for private purposes
in the context of a service that has been licensed by
rightholders, and wheretheharm totherightholder is minimal, be
subject to private copying levies?5

YES - Please explain

NO-Please explain

No, it is realistic for a rights holder and or other without
collective support, to police protect and/or enforce negative
procedure. It is not workable as it is reliant on obtaining
details of end users from third parties, who have brokered the
license which may be confidential, beyond information requests

and/or circumventive of confidential agreements or contracts in
place.

Until there are intelligent feedback processors in place or new
software products that restrict copies with authorized
pixelatedkeys. Evidence and information needs to be subject to
copying levies. NO OPINION

1.How wouldchanges in levies with respect to the application to
online services (e.g. services based on cloud computing
allowing, for instance, users to have copies on different
devices) impact the development and functioning of new business
models on the one hand and rightholders' revenue ontheother?

[Open question

Cloud computing is basically another storage device for users to
back up their computer systems with copies for safety in the
event of a crash. They are valuable so that users can have
access for personal use.

Therefor  if contained in another work in object similarity make
up and construction (intellectual and otherwise),then the
rightsholders revenueshould be requested by the cloud computing
operation when the rights holder code information becomes
flagged within their user "uploading" the said material from
his archive.

As an archiveiwonder if their move towards collecting may be
open to abuseof rights holders works. In a sense how personal
uploaded material became the copyright property of facebook by
free use,taxed at a later date by the automatic and possibly
deceptive relinquishment of subsequent personal rights.

1.Would you seean added value in making levies visible on the
invoices for products subject to levies?60YES-Please explain

Financial  honesty can reflect integrity and in respect to full
transparency levies could be a good conduit for proper conduct
in the 21st Century across the board. A persons reputation is
set by their latest transaction as on EBay.

Financial transactions are also reliant on customer feedback
which can effect future business and reflect sales. Therefor
this is the way to go?

NO - Please explain

NO OPINION

Diverging national systems levy different products and apply
different tariffs. This results in obstacles to the free
circulation of goods and services in the Single Market. At the
same time, many Member States continue to allow the
indiscriminate application of private copying levies to all
transactions irrespective of the person to whom the product
subject to a levy is sold (e.g. private person or business). In
that context, not all Member States have ex ante exemption
and/or ex post reimbursement schemes which could remedy these
situations and reduce the number of undue payments61.

1.Have you experienced a situation where a cross-border
transaction resulted in undue levy payments, or duplicate
payments of the same levy, or other obstaclesto the free
movement of goods or services?

YES-Please specify the type of transaction and indicate the
percentage of the undue payments. Please also indicate how a
priori exemption and/or ex post reimbursement schemes could
help to remedy the situation.

A. An obstacle to free movement of my goods and service is that
they are not universally unified which in the near future they
will be within the New World Order.

If member states of the Berne Convention, obtain private levies
within and beyond the single market, all transactions will be
configured so as a percentage of funds will flow to the
relevant person, minimizing any undue payments.

Eventually all member states with have ex- ante exemption and/or
ex post reimbursement schemes flowing to therelevant rights
owners.

The only relevant obstacle is that the WWW crashes with the
resultant catastrophic commercial fallout. It all runs on
electricity. If there is no electricity there will be not even
be due payments.

NO - Please explain

NO OPINION

1.What percentage of products subject to a levy is sold to
persons other than natural persons for purposes clearly
unrelated to private copying? Do any of those transactions
result in undue payments? Please explain in detail the example
you provide (type of products, type of transaction,
stakeholders, etc.).

[Open question]

Undue payments to Sir Richard Curtis by licence distribution of
derivative copy of object symbol (Artifact by intellectual
construction make up) in the MPH campaign, in disregard of
original asserted copyright across B2B networks.

Undue payments to Bono in One, ProductRed and Beatbullying
campaign initiatives in appropriation of object symbol in
object similarity and exploitation of copyright.(God forbid
that his first record should be likewise bootlegged)

Undue payments to Lance Armstrong in the Livestrong campaign in
the light of public deception and /or fraud by copyright
infringement as copied trademark shape and object symbol
appropriation^ the convicted dopepeddlar)

1.  Where such undue payments arise, what percentage of trade do
they affect? To what extent

could a priori exemptions and/or ex post reimbursement schemes
existing in some Member States help to remedythesituation?

[Open question

They effected all my personal trade and exiled me from my own
rights of copyright and IP by saturated and influential
appropriation.

Their  appropriation createsa debilitating despondency to create
innovative works by the overwhelming burden to protect them.

1.If you have identified specific problems with the current
functioning of the levy system, how would these problems best
be solved?

[Open question]

A. Obstruction to free circulation of key goods in the single
market, can only effect if it destroys the human right to fair
competition and/.or by adverse influence, (consumer or
otherwise by corporate) saturate exposure of a rights holder's
work by connected commercial exploitation to deny

the rights holders, any crumbs from the table of
profits.Capitalism at its most perverse cannot survive in the
21st Century. It is contrary to the populace's understanding of
it's function. You pay for what you get.

I.Fair remuneration of authors and performers

The EU copyright acquis recognises for authors and performers a
number of exclusive rights and, in the case of performers whose
performances are fixed in phonograms,remuneration rights. There
are few provisions in the EU

copyrightlaw governing thetransferof rights from authors or
performers to producers62or determining who the owner of the
rights is when the work or other subject matter is created in
the contextof an employment contract63. This is an area that
has been traditionally left for Member States to regulate and
there are significant differences in regulatory approaches.
Substantialdifferences also exist between different sectors of
the creative industries.

Concerns continue to be raised that authors and performers are
not adequately remunerated, in particular but not solely, as
regards online exploitation. Many consider that the economic
benefit of new forms of exploitation is not being fairly shared
along the whole value chain. Another commonly raised issue
concerns contractual practices, negotiation mechanisms,
presumptions of transfer of rights, buy-out clauses and the
lack of possibility to terminate contracts. Some stakeholders
are of the opinion that rules at national level do not suffice
to improve their situation and that action at EU level is
necessary.

1.[Inparticular if you are an author/performer:] What is the
best mechanism (or combination of mechanisms) to ensure that
you receive an adequate remuneration for the exploitation of
your works and performances?

[Open question]

Action at EU level is required as the economic benefit of new
forms of exploitation are not being fairly shared along the
whole value chain to create a vast open single market, but by
exploiting rights holders property without licence, rights
holders copyright is flagrantly abuse.

Many rights holder seem to be left holding their babies
blanketwhilst in plain view their "baby's" are dismembered.

Any attempt to protect those rights is tantamount to creative
suicide, an impossible exercise in a fragmented market reliant
on territories each with different rules and jurisdiction
restrictions.

The best mechanism would be at first to respect the efforts of
individual innovators and originators instead of a priority to
the subsequent generational appropriators.

Any producer needs to acquire the assignment of rights from the
author and/or Artist of works which by subsequent infringement
secured by deceptive contractual practices mislead the
contractual parties outside the rights holders knowledge.

The freelance self employed creative industries await payments
for rights in order to continue operation and creation. If the
the corporate remit is for CEO's to keep shareholders and/or
stakeholders share price up by non­payments to those rights
holders, there is only corporate growth but no benefit to those
who create

the content in order to secure the generated income from which
shareholders benefit.

Court costs for copyright infringement can exceed£50,000plus,
let alone the time to unravel the evidence to substantiate a
case in merit. It also seems impossible to to police ones works
or bring an action against online exploitation.

Rules at national level seem not to embrace or allow the
disadvantage in legal complexity of copyright and/or IP law, as
copyright is dictated by external learned legal professors, who
know not what it is to create, but facilitate to close
copyright loopholes against the interests of rights holders'

There is no effective remedy for rights holders and Citizens to
obtain legal advice via legal aid or be allowed the recognition
of at least the safe harbor of human rights in the right to a
fair hearing under Statutory law.

1.  Is there a need to act at theEUlevel (for instance to
prohibit certain clauses in contracts)?

YES-Please explain

A party to a contract who isnot the rights holder of the subject
material speculatively tendered, must not be allowed to
circumvent those rights of the creator and holder by malicious
slander and /or so by court costs denigrate and erode those
said rights contained in the contract,without a fair hearing.

If a party is insolvent pre contract then they should be
prohibited from making a contract, if the rights holders
position is compromised and/or eaten up by creditors waiting in
the wings to pounce without the rights holders prior knowledge.

This renders the contract null and void deceptive and possibly
obtained by fraudulent oversight. Further if a company is
previously disqualified for business misconduct against the
interests of the rights holder, by say a representative or
collecting society.

A contractual clause is suggested, to prevent a producer
(without licence) to be presumed to be the rights holder, when
their sole intention is to economically benefit from those
rights by sale (but without licence), at the expense of the
rights holders.

E.

NO OPINION

1.If youconsider that the current rules are not effective, what
would you suggest to address the shortcomings you identify?

[Open question]

The rules need to be amended to allow proper access to justice
without being tarnished by a prejudicial mindset against lip
who have a case in merit to bring for fair hearing.

To consider that numerous client conflicts from a cluster of
defendants in collective exploitation may prevent any right
holder for taking the legal effective remedy and rightful
opportunity to a court, so as to recognise a rights holders
rights and effort to protect them.

A rights holder should not be forced reluctantly to crawl though
the court system, with injunctive relief within specialist legal
areas such as IP, not suited for such hearings to obtain any
hearing. Further, then on appeal to the Hight Court,through
Appeal into the House of Commons then the Human Rights Court.

There needs to be a separateIP Court regulated by
theEUCommission that solely hears copyright and related matters
to audio visual work. Should authors suffer so much to protect
their works when online entities vastly profit beyond the law
of copyright and respected rights?

I.Respect for rights

Directive 2004/48/EE64provides for a harmonised framework for
the civil enforcement of intellectual property rights,
including copyright and related rights. The Commission has
consulted broadly on this text65. Concerns have been raised as
to whether some of its provisions are still fit to ensure a
proper respect for copyright in the digital age. On the one
hand, the current measures seem to be insufficient to deal with
the new challenges brought by the dissemination of digital
content on the internet; on the other hand, there are concerns
about the current balance between enforcement of copyright and
the protection of fundamental rights, in particular the right
for a private life and data protection. While it cannotbe
contested that enforcement measures should always be available
in case of infringement of copyright, measures could be
proposed to strengthen respect for copyright when the infringed
content is used for a commercial purpose66. One means to do this
could be to clarify the role of intermediaries in the IP
infrastructure67. At the same time, there could be
clarification of the safeguards for respect of private life and
data protection for private users.

1.Should the civil enforcement system in theEUbe rendered
moreefficient for infringements of copyright committed with a
commercial purpose?

YES - Please explain

Intermediaries could be recruited from law Universities where
they may qualify in copyright and related rights. They could
broker copyrightinfringement cases to the respective legal
representation and/or give advice under the umbrella protection
of theEUDirectives and commission. towards MEP's for moral
support.

They could also possibly enterinto direct ADR as mediators in
simple cases involving one or two defendants. In more
complicated cases they could refer the case on merits to their
overseer who could lead a team of qualified Counsel to enforce
copyright infringements a a public prosecutor in crime.

The digital age although relatively new, most young citizens
perpetuate a free for all mentality- by mass consumption. When
instead they should be educated to respect their foundations of
mixed media constructive appropriative interplay.

What  users appropriate was from previous generations original
intellectual effort. Are their rights of copyright to be
extinguished by a mere distribution network?

What enforcement measures are currently available in the case of
copyright infringement when the content and/or Artifact (in my
case) has been exploited for industrialized commercial purpose?

Not to say that the right to private life and data protection is
not important, as it should not superceed concerns about the
current balance between enforcement of copyright and the
protection of fundamental rights.

What remedies are there available for civil enforcement in
complicated copyright infringement cases other than Court
proceedings. The bigger the commercial purpose and economic
opportunity, the more strategic exploiters will be to cover
their tracks avoid prosecution.

What if a citizen designed the IPad without Apple's support,
could he sue Apple or any corporate for copyright infringement?

Any content whether it be information, a device containing an
intellectual function, or a solid physical object such as an
Artifact needs copyright protection if legally asserted and
copied in object similarity. The law cannot discriminate as it
is bound not todo,on what constitutes and warrants copyright
protection.

Who then are intermediaries empowered to decide on what warrants
copyright protection and/or enforcement for infringement, when
only the courts can decide?

J. Could intermediaries work as court clerks with Judicial
review? Could they be qualified tand/or have the right of
audience in court and or have a right to make opinion ?

In any case of mass industrial manufacture production, online
dissemination and direct online marketing, thelegal dominance
is usually the deciding factor. Might is not always right, as
legal bullying is not fair play if a one sided argument.

As a stakeholder of copyright fixed and asserted, is the status
of the the rights holder not sacrosanct ,consideringthe value a
right holders content or object brings to the the plagiarists
table?

J. How then is it that the advent of online content seems an
excuse to erode rights holders copyright, by the lack of
copyright enforcement, legal support to protect it from and by
abuse of distribution networks hungry for the latest fad or
trend. Ready to trample all to get it without any legal
recourse.

H.it could reveal the wholecopyright debacle as a farce, as the
stock by which someone earns his livelihood cut off at the
legs.

NO - Please explain

NO OPINION

1.In particular, is the current legal framework clear enough to
allow for sufficient involvement of intermediaries (suchas
Internet service providers, advertising brokers, payment
service providers, domain name registrars, etc.) in inhibiting
online copyright infringements with a commercial purpose? If
not, what measures would be useful to foster the cooperation of
intermediaries?

[Open question]

One could say that the IPO are intermediaries but are not
legally qualified and on record to make comment on copyright.

Intermediaries need to be empowered by whom to regulate and
inhibit online copyright infringements witha commercial
purpose.

Are they employed by the EU or by the internet service
providers?

In whose interests do they represent - the corporate exploiter
and/or the individual rights holder?

A useful measure could be toinstigate education in this field
byEUdirected remit across territories,so as to employ citizens
in the future interested in this occupation. How they got paid
and/or who would employ them is another issue worth
considering.

take down an offending site if presented with the relevant
evidence and brief summary to present a case in merit of
copyright infringement and the offending website cannot prove
their copyright as a prior work

protected by the rights holder without license or agreement
pending hearing

1.Does the current civil enforcementframework ensure that the
right balance is achieved between the right to have one's
copyright respected and other rights such as the protection of
private life and protection of personal data?

YES - Please explain

The current civil enforcement framework that encloses the
internet with law, (online and offline) is constantly abused by
online commercial marketeers who are legally advised to
disregard any claims, if unsolicited. A rights holder is
therefor obstructed from even entering ADR.

These so called internet opportunists or entrepreneurs and/or so
called "philanthropists" exploit copyright for commercial
purposes without any respect to the rights holders, even if
known.

Full advantage is made of online anonymity, whilst exploiting
users and buyers from behind websites as attractive storefronts
of business respectability. Howevermostdo not have product in
stock but are sole online delivery retailers for other unknown
subcontractors, who hide their personal data.

Is it not the right of any consumer to know a sellers personal
information without having to request a court order to obtain
it , in order to serve documents? This is tedious and needs
balancing out by regulation for transparent display.

It seems that a celebrity has more protection over his private
life than a Citizen over his copyright or related works. A
Citizen is buried by their inability of time, money or energy,
to pursue the infringers for licence, royalties and/or
infiltrate the fathomed depths of impenetrable corporate walls
surrounding infringement.

Furthermore, it is nigh on impossible to obtain legal
representation in a contentious case regarding copyright
infringement, faced with formidable adjoined exploitation.
Especially when it is not a question of who has rippedyou off
but who has not, The results of pyramid franchising and online
user customization.

By experience, various conflictsof interest occur which
circumvents client confidentiality agreements before even legal
representation is formally on record. Much time is consumed in
this pursuit so as to confirm the core of exploitation and
engineers of the copyright infringements.

This fragments proceedings as investigations need to be carried
out to ascertain who one is to pursue.

In the case of protection of personal data, and protection of
private life, this is a walk in the park compared to the hoops
one has to jump throughto pursue copyright/IP infringement.
However slander is a personal attack on ones reputation.

In the protection of copyright, first there is the discovery of
infringement, counterfeiting, piracy, customization, the
investigation of companies involvedwhich could be numerous,
their sales, their employees, their associates , their
partners, their partners partners etc etc until one is
empowered with the relevant evidence

to argue the merits. Then there is the research online and
offline to discover if there is a prior work to yours, all
within the timeline history, the people involved , the
institutions. The legal research, case in precedents, summary
of case, skeleton arguments, copyright law amendments etc etc
until the case is framed

and ready for hearing. Then there is the security of costs,
indemnity insurance, attempts at ADR etc etc. This is no easy
feat as one becomes entangled in a birds nest of strategic
deceit, smoke and mirrors.

NO-Please explain

NO OPINIONI.A singleEUCopyright Title

The idea of establishing a unified EU Copyright Title has been
present in the copyright debate for quite some time now,
although views as to the merits and the feasibility of such an
objective are divided. A unified EU Copyright Title would
totally harmonise the area of copyright law in theEUand replace
national laws. There would then be a singleEUtitle instead of a
bundle of national rights. Some see this as the only manner in
which a truly Single Market for content protectedby copyright
can be ensured, while others believe that the same objective
can better be achieved by establishing a higher level of
harmonisation while allowing for a certain degree of
flexibility and specificity in Member States' legal systems.

1.Should theEUpursue the establishment of a singleEUCopyright
Title, as a means of establishing a consistent framework for
rights and exceptions to copyright across theEU,as well as a
single framework for enforcement?

YES

The collecting society andor rights holder could register within
a unified EU Copyright Title that also creates a framework for
enforcement in complicated cases, where there is no remedy for
injunctive relief to allow the rights holder to destroy
counterfeit copies without a courthearing of the full case.

There needs to be a certain amount of flexibility, to allow
lower courts within the Member States to consider the
Particulars of Claim in respect to copyright infringement, but
harmonized at a higher level to allow Access toJustice in cases
of extreme corporate exploitation such as mine.

The right to a fair legal hearing should not exist for those who
have the financial means to abuse it. Specifically if reliant on
those rights to generate income and perverse profit at the
rights holders expense and suffering.

if then contained within the EU Copyright Title, a rights holder
might expectsomeform of protection of his copyrightby way of
embedded encryption and/or mark so that any infringement can be
flagged digitally. This could then be fed into the rights
holders account with processes directed down from that Chain of
Command,

that facilitate options for legal remedy with thefull support
ofEUharmonization acting from within the Berne Convention of
basic Human Rights overlooked in UK Courts.

What protective copyright enforcement, benefit and/or legal
remit may a rights holder acquire, if ensured by a single
market but faced with derivative infringement?

At this time , a rights holder may have no option but to drag
their case into the courts before even the least respect to
Alternative Dispute Resolution compliance is acknowledged as
directed by Lord Justice Rules.

G.Basedonpast experience, the defendants will predictably
attempt any form of legal trickery to avoid a hearing in Court,
to conceal their abuse of the law and a rights holders
copyright. This needs to be rebalanced, if the
singleEUCopyright Title has any future merit.

NO

NO OPINION

1.Should this be the next step in the development ofcopyright in
theEU?Does the current level of difference among the Member
State legislation mean that this is a longer term project?

[Open question]

Of course it is a long term project which needs urgent
consideration. However it is obviously going to take time to
implement as it has taken some16years to be effective in the
music field, even with innovative Apps and new code identifiers
in current development and use.

The Visual Arts desperately need a form of regulated code
outside privatized collective associations, who are not
qualified to make legal comment, in regards to copyright
acceptance, infringement and/or enforcement.

In fact, suchprivate associations may have conflicts of
interests in protecting one of their members rights and/or face
negative member consensus, possible detrimental effects to their
sponsorship support and/or adverse influence from one of their
board,

(who may notbe a rights holder or reliant on a livelihood from
their creative practice). I cannot imagine any other occupation
in which one does the work and expects to hand it over lock
stock and barrel for free.

In retrospect, it seems mostare too afraid to question any
copyright infringement as they and/or their lawyers could face
such overzealous proaction, it could be a financial burden too
heavy to bear. Their families could starve.

Furthermore there is no fall safe should the casein merit be
struck out by legal trickery before the case is heard, on the
basis of court costs. This is obviously inappropriate.

That said, if a work was crafted before the internet even
existed ( as in mine), and it was exploited solely by the given
availability of online distribution post1998then theEUCopyright
Title (if registered) needs to secure thesamegiven protection.

Commercial industrialization needs to exploit rights holders
creations in order to create the product that is desired bythe
online users and buyers. If this continues with perverse
exploitation without fair remuneration, creators will cease and
desist from manifesting tangible value in the form IP.

The creators and rights holders who has nurtured, mined, created
and crafted the golden egg, cannot be expected to tolerate
abusive exploitation of their legal rights. The exploiters of
rights may also suffer.

The developement of copyright law in the EU harmonization,
should not either disregard International compliance as
signatories of the Berne Convention . In fact it should form
the backbone for single EU Copyright Title. protection and
rights enforcement.

The above questionnaire aimsto provide a comprehensive
consultation on the most important matters relating to the
currentEUlegal framework for copyright. Should any important
matters have been omitted, we would appreciate if you could
bring them to our attention, so they can be properly addressed
in the future.

1.Are thereany other important matters related to theEUlegal
framework for copyright? Please explain and indicate how such
matters should be addressed.

[Open question]

A. I am disgusted as a lawabiding Citizen and rights holder,
that in order to protect ones copyright andIP,one is forced to
endure not only an overwhelming burden of proof (even if in
possession of an arguable case with merits), but that the
infringers gain further economic advantage in
legalnoncompliance

