


Public Consultationonthe review oftheEUcopyright rules

Contents

Introduction  2

Context of the consultation  2

How to submit replies to thisquestionnaire  3

Confidentiality  3

Rights and the functioning of the Single Market  7

Why is it not possible to access many online content services
from anywhere in Europe?  7

Is there a need for more clarity as regards the scope of what
needs to be authorised (or not) in digital transmissions?  10

The act of "making available"  10

Two rights involved in a single act of exploitation  11

Linking and browsing  12

Download to own digital content  13

Registration of works and other subject matter-is it a good
idea?  14

How to improve the use and interoperability of identifiers  15

Term of protection-is it appropriate?  16

Limitations and exceptions in the Single Market  17

Access to content in libraries and archives  20

Preservation and archiving  20

Off-premises access to library collections  21

E-lending  22

Mass digitisation  23

Teaching  24

Research  25

Disabilities  26

Text and data mining  27

User-generated content  29

Private copying and reprography  32

Fair remuneration of authors and performers  35

Respect for rights  37

A singleEUCopyright Title  38

Other issues  39

I.Introduction

A. Context of the consultation

Over the last two decades, digital technology and the Internet
have reshaped the ways in which content is created,
distributed, and accessed. New opportunitieshave materialised
for those that create and produce content (e.g. a film, a
novel, a song), for new and existing dis­tribution platforms,
for institutions such as libraries, for activities such as
research and for citizens who now expect to be able to access
content-for information, education or enter­tainment
purposes-regardless of geographical borders.

This new environment also presentschallenges. One of them is for
the market to continue to adapt to new forms of distribution and
use. Another one is for the legislator to ensure that the system
of rights, limitations to rights and enforcement remains
appropriate and is adapted to the newenvironment. This
consultation focuses on the second of these challenges:
ensuring that theEUcopyright regulatory framework stays fit for
purpose in the digital environment to support creation and
innovation, tap the full potential of the Single Market,foster
growth and investment in our economy and promote cultural
diversity.

In its "Communication on Content in the Digital Single Market"1

COM(2012)789final,18/12/2012.

the Commission set out two parallel tracks of action: on the one
hand, to complete its on-going effort to review and to modernise
theEUcopyright legislative framework23with a view to a decision
in2014on whether to table legislative reform proposals, and on
the other, to facilitate practical industry- led solutions
through the stakeholder dialogue "Licences for Europe" on
issues on which rapid progress was deemed necessary and
possible.

The "Licences for Europe" process has been finalised now2

See the document "Licences for Europe-templedges to bring more
content
online":http://ec.europa.eu/internalmarket/copyright/docs/licences-for-europe/131113
ten-pledges en.pdf.

. The Commission welcomes thepractical solutions stakeholders
have put forward in this context and will monitor their
pro­gress. Pledges have been made by stakeholders in all four
Working Groups (cross border portability of services,
user-generated content, audiovisual and film heritage and text
and data mining). Taken together, the Commission expects these
pledges to be a further step in making the user environment
easier in many different situations. The Commission also takes
note of the fact that two groups-user-generated contentand text
and data mining-did not reach consensus among participating
stakeholders on either the problems to be addressed or on the
results. The discussions and results of "Licences for Europe"
will be also taken into account in the context of the reviewof
the legislative framework.

As part of the review process, the Commission is now launching a
public consultation on is­sues identified in the Communication
on Content in the Digital Single Market, i.e.:"territori­ality
in the Internal Market,harmonisation,limitations and exceptions
to copyright in the digital age; fragmentation of theEUcopyright
market; and how to improve the effectiveness and efficiency of
enforcement while underpinning its legitimacy in the wider
context of copy­right reform". Ashighlighted in the
October2013European Council Conclusions3

EUCO169/13, 24/25October2013.

"Providing digital services and content across the single market
requires the establishment of a copyright regime for the digital
age. The Commissionwill therefore complete its on-going review
of theEUcopyright framework in spring2014.It is important to
modernise Europe's copyright re­gime and facilitate licensing,
while ensuring a high level protection of intellectual property
rights and taking into account cultural diversity".

This consultation builds on previous consultations and public
hearings, in particular those on the"Green Paper on copyright
in the knowledge economy"4

COM(2008)466/3,http://ec.europa.eu/internalmarket/copyright/copyright-infso/index
en.htm#maincontentSec2.

, the "Green Paper on the online distribution of audiovisual
works"5

COM(2011)
427final,http://ec.europa.eu/internalmarket/consultations/2011/audiovisual
en.htm.

and "Content Online"6

http://ec.europa.eu/internalmarket/consultations/2009/content
online en.htm.

. These consultations providedvaluable feedback from
stakeholders on a number of questions, on issues as diverse as
the ter- ritoriality of copyright and possible ways to overcome
territoriality, exceptions related to the online dissemination
of knowledge, and rightholders' remuneration, particularly in
the audio­visual sector. Views were expressed by stakeholders
representing all stages in the value chain, including right
holders, distributors, consumers, and academics. The questions
elicited widely diverging views on the best way toproceed. The
"Green Paper on Copyright in the Knowl­edge Economy" was
followed up by a Communication. The replies to the "Green Paper
on the online distribution of audiovisual works" have fed into
subsequent discussions on the Collec­tive Rights
ManagementDirective and into the current review process.

How to submit replies to this questionnaire

You are kindly asked to send your repliesby5February2014in a MS
Word, PDF orOpen­Documentformat to the following e-mail address
of DG Internal Market and
Services:markt-copyright-consultation@ec.europa.eu.Please note
that replies sent after that date will not be taken into
account.

This consultation is addressed to different categories of
stakeholders. To the extent possible, the questions indicate
the category/ies of respondents most likely to be concerned by
them (annotation in brackets, before the actual question).
Respondents should nevertheless feel free to reply to any/all
of the questions. Also, please note that, apart from the
question concerning the identification of the respondent, none
of the questions is obligatory. Replies containing answers only
to part of the questions will be also accepted.

You are requestedto provide your answers directly within this
consultation document. For the "Yes/No/No opinion" questions
please put the selected answer inboldandunderlineit so it is
easy for us to see your selection.

In your answers to the questions, you are invitedto refer to the
situation inEUMemberStates.You are also invited in particular to
indicate, where relevant, what would be the im­pact of options
you put forward in terms of costs, opportunities and revenues.

The public consultation isavailable in English. Responses may,
however, be sent in any of the24official languages of theEU.

Confidentiality

The contributions received in this round of consultation as well
as a summary report present­ing the responses in astatistical
and aggregated form will be published on the website of DG
MARKT.

Please note that all contributions received will be published
together with the identity of the contributor, unless the
contributor objects to the publication of their personaldata on
the grounds that such publication would harm his or her
legitimate interests. In this case, the con­tribution will be
published in anonymous form upon the contributor's explicit
request. Other­wise the contribution will not be published nor
will its content be reflected in the summary report.

Please read ourPrivacy statement.

PLEASE IDENTIFY YOURSELF:

Name:

Inthe interests of transparency, organisations (including, for
example,NGOs,trade associa­tions and commercial enterprises)
are invited to provide the public with relevant information
about themselves by registering in the Interest Representative
Register and subscribing to its Code of Conduct.

·If you are a Registered organisation, please indicate your
Register ID number below. Your contribution will then be
considered as representing the views of your organisa­tion.

·If your organisation is not registered, you have the
opportunity toregister now. Re­sponses from organisations not
registered will be published separately.

If you would like to submit your reply on an anonymous basis
please indicate it belowby underlining the following answer:

·Yes, I would like to submit my reply on an anonymous basis

TYPE OF RESPONDENT(Pleaseunderlinethe appropriate):

€End user/consumer(e.g. internet user, reader, subscriber to
music or audiovisual ser­vice, researcher, student)OR
Representative of end users/consumers

for the purposes of this questionnaire normally referred to in
questions as"end us­ers/consumers"

€Institutional user(e.g. school, university, research centre,
library, archive)OR Rep­resentative of institutional users

for the purposes of this questionnaire normally referred to in
questions as"institu­tional users"

XAuthor/PerformerOR Representative of authors/performers

€Publisher/Producer/Broadcaster OR Representative of
publish­ers/producers/broadcasters

the two above categoriesare, for the purposes of this
questionnaire, normally re­ferred to in questions as"right
holders"

€Intermediary/Distributor/Other service provider(e.g. online
music or audiovisual service, games platform, social media,
search engine, ICT industry)OR Representa­tive of
intermediaries/distributors/other service providers

for the purposes of this questionnaire normally referred to in
questions as"service providers"

€  Collective Management Organisation

€  Public authority

€  Member State

€  Other(Please explain):

II.Rightsand the functioning of the Single Market

A. Why is it not possible to access many online content services
from any­where in Europe?

[The territorial scope of therights involved in digital
transmissions and the segmentation of the market through
licensing agreements]

Holders of copyright and related rights-e.g. writers, singers,
musicians-do not enjoy a single protection in theEU.Instead,
they areprotected on the basis of a bundle of national rights
in each Member State. Those rights have been largely harmonised
by the existingEUDirectives. However, differences remain and the
geographical scope of the rights is limited to the territory of
the Member State granting them. Copyright is thus territorial
in the sense that rights are acquired and enforced on a
country-by-country basis under national law7

This principle has been confirmed by the Court of justice on
several occasions.

.

The disseminationof copyright-protected content on the
Internet-e.g. by a music streaming service, or by an online
e-book seller-therefore requires, in principle, an
authorisation for each national territory in which the content
is communicated to the public. Rightholders are, of course, in
a position to grant a multi-territorial or pan-European
licence, such that content services can be provided in several
Member States and across borders. A number of steps have been
taken atEUlevel to facilitate multi-territorial licences: the
proposal for a Directive on Collective Rights Management8

Proposal for a Directive of the European Parliament and of the
Council of11July2012on collective man­agementof copyright and
related rights and multi-territorial licensing of rights in
musical works for online uses in the internal market,
COM(2012)372final.

should significantly facilitate the delivery
ofmulti­territoriallicences in musical works for
onlineservices9

Collective Management Organisations play a significant role in
the management of online rights for musical works in contrast
to the situation where online rights are licensed directly by
right holders such as film or record producers or by newspaper
or book publishers.

; the structured stakeholder dialogue "Licences for Europe"10

You can find more information on the following
website:http://ec. europa.eu/licences-for-europe-dialo gue/.

and market-led developments such as the on-going work in the
Linked Content Coalition11

You can find more information on the following
website:http://www.linkedcontentcoalition.org/.

.

"Licences for Europe" addressedin particular the specific issue
of cross-border portability, i.e. the ability of consumers
having subscribed to online services in their Member State to
keep accessing them when travelling temporarily to other Member
States. As a result, representa­tivesof the audio-visual sector
issued a joint statement affirming their commitment to
con­tinue working towards the further development of
cross-border portability12

See the document "Licences for Europe-templedges to bring more
content
online":http://ec.europa.eu/internalmarket/copyright/docs/licences-for-europe/131113
ten-pledges en.pdf.

.

Despite progress, there are continued problems with the
cross-border provision of, and access to, services. These
problems are most obvious to consumers wanting to access
services that are made available in Member States other than
the one in which they live. Not all online ser­vices are
available in all Member States and consumers face problems when
trying to access such services across borders. In some
instances, even if the "same" service is available in all
Member States, consumers cannot access the service across
borders (they can only access their "national" service, and if
they try to access the "same" service in another Member State
they are redirected to the one designated for their country of
residence).

This situation may in part stem from the territoriality of
rights and difficulties associated with the clearing of rights
in different territories. Contractual clauses in licensing
agreements be­tween right holders and distributors and/or
between distributors and end users may also be at the origin of
some of the problems (denial of access, redirection).

The main issue at stake here is, therefore, whetherfurther
measures (legislative ornon­legislative,including market-led
solutions) need to be taken atEUlevel in the medium term13

For possible long term measures such as the establishment of a
European Copyright Code (establishing a single title) see
section VII of this consultation document.

to increase the cross-border availability of content services in
the Single Market, while ensur­ing an adequate level of
protection for right holders.

1.[In particular if you are an end user/consumer:]Have you faced
problems when try­ing to access online services in anEUMember
State other than the one in which you live?

□YES-Please provide examples indicating the Member State, the
sector and the type of content concerned (e.g. premium content
suchas certain films and TV series, audio-visual content in
general, music, e-books, magazines, journals and newspapers,
games, applications and other software)

NO

NO OPINION

2.[In particular if you are a service provider:]Have you faced
problems whenseeking toprovideonline services across borders in
theEU?

YES-Please explain whether such problems, in your experience,
are related to copyright or to other issues (e.g. business
decisions relating to the cost of providing services across
bor­ders, compliance with other laws such as consumer
protection)? Please provide examples in­dicating the Member
State, the sector and the type of content concerned (e.g.
premium content such as certain films and TV series,
audio-visual content in general, music,e-books, maga­zines,
journals and newspapers, games, applications and other
software).

NO

NO OPINION

[In particular if you are a right holder or a collective
management organisation:]How often are you asked to grant
multi-territorial licences?Please indicate, if possible, the
number of requests per year and provide examples indicating the
Member State, the sector and the type of content concerned.

AlsUrheber durch Verwertungsgesellschaft gewährleistet

If you have identified problemsin the answers to any of the
questions above-whatwould be the bestway totackle them?

Am besten ist es, die Rechte von Verwertungsgesellschaften
wahrnehmen zu lassen, die durch Gegenseitigkeitsverträge
international verbunden sind und deshalb über eininhaltlich und
räumlich umfassendes Rechterepertoire verfügen.

5.[Inparticular if you are a right holder or a collective
management organisation:]Are there reasons why, even in cases
where you holdaHthe necessary rights foraHthe territo­ries
inquestion, you would still find it necessary or justified to
impose territorial restric­tions on a service provider (in
order, for instance, to ensure that access to certain content
is not possible in certain European countries)?

YES-Please explain by giving examples

NO

X NO OPINION

6.[In particular if you are e.g. a broadcaster or a service
provider:]Are there reasons why, evenin cases where you have
acquired all the necessary rights for all the territories in
question, you would still find it necessary or justified to
impose territorial restrictions on the service recipient (in
order for instance, to redirect the consumer to adifferent
website than the one he is trying toaccess)?

YES-Please explain by giving examples

NO

X NO OPINION

7.Do you think that further measures (legislative or
non-legislative, including market-led solutions) are needed
atEUlevel to increase the cross-border availability of content
ser­vices in the Single Market, while ensuring an adequate
level of protection for right hold­ers?

YES-Please explain

X

Ein einheitliches Urheberrecht für die EU mit entsprechenden
Regelungen ist nur dann zu befürworten, wenn die Rechte der
Urheber auf gehobenem Standard gewahrt werden; keinesfalls darf
es eine Schwächung der Urheber geben, nur um reinen
Markterfordernissen gerecht zu werden. Der Schutz des Urhebers
ist die Grundvoraus­setzung für kreatives Schaffen und damit
auch für die Entstehung handelbarer Kultur­güter!

NO-Please explain□NO OPINION

B.Is there a need for more clarity as regards the scope of what
needs to be authorised (or not) in digital transmissions?

[The definition of the rights involved in digital transmissions]

The EU framework for the protectionof copyright and related
rights in the digital environment is largely established by
Directive 2001/29/EC14

Directive 2001/29/EC of the European Parliament and of the
Council of22May2001on theharmonisationof certain aspects of
copyright and relatedrights in the information society.

on theharmonisationof certain aspects of copyright and related
rights in the information society. OtherEUdirectives in this
field that are relevant in the online environment are those
relating to the protection of software15

Directive 2009/24/EC of the European Parliament and of the
Council of23April2009on the legal protection of computer
programs.

and databases16

Directive 96/9/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council
of11March1996on the legal protection of databases.

.

Directive 2001/29/EC harmonises the rights of authors and
neighbouring rightholders17

Film and record producers, performers and broadcasters are
holders of so-called "neighbouring rights" in, re­spectively,
their films, records, performances and broadcast. Authors'
content protected by copyright is referred to as a "work" or
"works", while content protected by neighbouring rights is
referred to as "other subject mat­ter".

which are essential for the transmission of digital copies of
works (e.g. an e-book) and other protected subject matter (e.g.
a record in a MP3 format) over the internet or similar digital
networks.

The most relevant rights for digital transmissions are the
reproduction right, i.e. the right to authorise or prohibit the
making of copies18

The right to "authorise or prohibit direct or indirect,
temporary or permanent reproduction by any means and in any
form, in whole or in part" (see Art.2of Directive 2001/29/EC)
althoughtemporary acts of reproduction of a transient or
incidental nature are, under certain conditions, excluded (see
art.5(1)of Directive 2001/29/EC).

, (notably relevant at the start of the transmission-e.g. the
uploading of a digital copy of a work to aserver in view of
making it available-and at the users' end-e.g. when a user
downloads a digital copy of a work) and the communica­tion to
the public/making available right, i.e. the rights to authorise
or prohibit the dissemina­tion of the works in digital
networks19

The right to authorise or prohibit any communication to the
public by wire or wireless means and to authorise or prohibit
the making available to the public "on demand" (see Art.3of
Directive 2001/29/EC).

. These rights are intrinsicallylinked in digital transmis­sions
and both need to be cleared.

1.The act of "making available"

Directive 2001/29/EC specifies neitherwhatis covered by the
making availableright (e.g. the upload, the accessibility by
the public, the actual reception by the public) norwherethe act
of "making available" takes place. This does not raise questions
if the act is limited to a single territory. Questions arise
however when the transmission covers several territories and
rights need to be cleared (does the act of "making available"
happen in the country of the upload only? in each of the
countries where the content is potentially accessible? in each
of the coun­tries where the content is effectively accessed?).
The most recent case law of the Court of Jus­tice of the
European Union (CJEU) suggests that a relevant criterion is the
"targeting" of a certain Member State's public20

See in particular Case C-173/11(Football Dataco vsSportradar)and
Case C-5/11(Donner)for copyright and related rights, and Case
C-324/09(L'Oréalvs eBay) for trademarks. With regard to
jurisdiction see also joined Cases C-585/08 and C-144/09
(Pammer and HotelAlpenhof)and pending
CaseC-441/13(PezHejduk);see however, adopting a different
approach, Case C-170/12 (Pinckney vs KDGMediatech).

. According to this approach the copyright-relevant act (which
has to be licensed) occurs at least in those countries which
are "targeted" by the online

service provider. A service provider"targets"agroup of customers
residing in a specific country when it directs its activity to
that group, e.g. via advertisement, promotions, a language or a
currency specifically targeted at that group.

8.Is the scope of the "making available" right in cross-border
situations-i.e. when con­tent is disseminated across
borders-sufficiently clear?

YES

X NO-Please explain how this couldbe clarified and what type of
clarification would be required (e.g. as in "targeting"
approach explained above, as in "country of origin" ap­proach21

The objective of implementing a "country of origin" approach is
to localise the copyright relevant act that must be licenced in
a single Member State (the "country of origin", which could be
for example the Member State in which the content is uploaded
or where the service provider is established), regardless of in
how many Member States the work can be accessed or received.
Such an approach has already been introduced atEUlevel with
regard to broadcasting by satellite (see Directive 93/83/EEC on
the coordination of certain rules concerning copyright and
rights related to copyright applicable to satellite
broadcasting and cable retransmission).

)

Nein, da strittig ist, ob es sich bei diesem Recht nur um ein
Bereithaltungsrecht und einzusätzliches Abrufsrecht oder um
beides handelt. Es sollte klargestellt werden,dasses sich um
ein zweistufigesNutzungsrecht handelt, bestehend aus der
Bereithaltung und dem Abruf. Allerdings benötigt man das Recht
für sämtliche Länder, in denen das Werk bestimmungsgemäß
abgerufen werden kann.

NOOPINION

9.[Inparticular if you are a right holder:]Could a clarification
of the territorial scope ofthe "making available" right have an
effect on the recognition of your rights(e.g.whether you are
considered to be an author or not, whether you are considered
to have transferred your rights or not), onyour remuneration,
or on the enforcement of rights (including the availability of
injunctive relief4)?

X YES-Please explain how such potential effects could be
addressedInden Erwägungs­gründen sollte klargestellt
werden,dassdas Recht grundsätzlich für jeden Mitgliedstaat, für
den das Werk bestimmungsgemäß bereitgestellt und von dem aus es
bestimmungsgemäß abgerufen werden kann, erworben und vergütet
werden muss.

NO

NOOPINION

2.Tworightsinvolvedina single act of exploitation

Each act of transmission in digital networks entails (in the
current state of technology and law) several reproductions.
This means that there are two rights that apply to digital
transmis­sions: the reproduction right and the making available
right. This may complicate the licens­ing of works for online
use notably when the two rights are held by different
persons/entities.

10.iinparticular if you a service provider orariehtholder:]Does
the application of tworights to a single act of economic
exploitation in the online environment(e.g. adownload) create
problems for you?

□YES-Please explain what type of measures would be needed in
order to address such problems (e.g. facilitation of joint
licences when the rights are in different hands, legislation to
achieve the "bundling of rights")

X NO

wenn klargestellt wird, dass beide Rechte erworben
werdenmüssenund auch die Rechtsinhaber jeweils auf
daszusätzlichzu erwerbende Recht verweisen und angeben, wo
dieses Recht erworben werden kann. Der Markt ist auch in der
Vergangenheit mit

dieser Gegebenheit durchaus zurechtgekommen.

□NO OPINION

3.Linking and browsing

Hyperlinks are references todata that lead a user from one
location in the Internet to another. They are indispensable for
the functioning of the Internet as a network. Several cases are
pending before the CJEU22

CasesC-466/12(Svensson),C-348/13(BestwaterInternational) and
C-279/13 (CMore entertainment).

in which the question has been raised whether the provision of a
clickable link constitutes an act of communication to the
public/making available to the pub­lic subject to the
authorisation of the rightholder.

A user browsingthe internet (e.g. viewing a web-page) regularly
creates temporary copies of works and other subject-matter
protected under copyright on the screen and in the 'cache'
memory of his computer. A question has been referred to the
CJEU23

CaseC-360/13 (PublicRelationsConsultants Association Ltd). See
alsohttp://www.supremecourt.gov.uk/decided-cases/docs/UKSC2011
0202PressSummary.pdf.

as to whether such cop­iesare always covered by the mandatory
exception for temporary acts of reproduction pro­vided for in
Article5(1)of Directive 2001/29/EC.

11.Should theprovision of a hyperlink leadingto a work or other
subject matter protected under copyright, either in general or
under specific circumstances, be subject to the authorisation
of the rightholder?

X YES-Please explain whether you consider this to be the case in
general, or under specific circumstances, and why

Ja, wenn es nicht beimüblichenHinweis einer Fundstelle bleibt.
Es ist nicht einzusehen,warum derjenige, der sein Werk ins Netz
stellt und auf seiner Webseite zugänglich macht, selbst
zusätzlich technische Schutzmaßnahmen oder dergleichen
einsetzen muss, damit Dritte sich nicht seiner Werke im Wege
von Links bedienen, während der Linksetzer es ohne Aufwand bei
der Angabe der Fundstelle belassen kann, damit Interessenten
direkt auf die fremde Webseite zugehen können. Das
betrifftinsbesondere

dasFraming.

NO-Please explain whether you consider this to be the case in
general, or under specific circumstances, and why (e.g. because
it does not amount to an act of communication to the public-or
to a new public, or becauseit should be covered by a copyright
exception)

NO OPINION

12.Should the viewing of a web-page where this implies the
temporary reproduction of a work or other subject matter
protected under copyright on the screenand in the cache memory
of the user's computer, either in general or under specific
circum­stances, be subject to the authorisation of the
rightholder?

X YES-Please explain whether you consider this to be the case in
general, or under specific circumstances, and why

Körperliche Werkexemplare und deren Verbreitung werden zunehmend
von bloßen Werkübermittlungen ersetzt, z.B. Cloud-Computing,
Streaming etc. Außerdem gibt es zunehmend Geschäftsmodelle, die
Lücken der bestehenden Gesetzeslage ausnutzen, um den Erwerb der
Rechte und eine Vergütung der Urheber und Rechtsinhaber zu
vermeiden, z.B. Internet-Videorecorder, E-Mail-Versand.
Esmussdeshalb auch am unmittelbaren Werkgenuss angeknüpft
werden, um auch solche Nutzungen erfassen zu können. Dazu zählt
auchdie Nutzung am Bildschirm.

NO-Please explain whether you consider this to be the case in
general, or under specific circumstances, and why (e.g. because
it is or should be covered by a copyright exception)

NO OPINION

4.Download to own digital content

Digital content is increasingly being bought via digital
transmission (e.g. download to own). Questions arise as to the
possibility for users to disposeof the files they buy in this
manner (e.g. by selling them or by giving them as a gift). The
principle ofEUexhaustion of the distri­bution right applies in
the case of the distribution of physical copies (e.g. when a
tangible arti­cle such as a CD or abook, etc. is sold, the
right holder cannot prevent the further distribution of that
tangible article)24

See also recital28of Directive 2001/29/EC.

. The issue that arises here is whether this principle can also
be ap­plied in the case of an act of transmission equivalent in
its effect to distribution (i.e. where the buyer acquires the
property of the copy)25

In Case C-128/11(Oracle vs. UsedSoft) the CJEU ruled that an
author cannot oppose the resale of a second­hand licence that
allows downloading his computer program from his website and
using it for an unlimited pe­riod of time. The exclusive right
of distribution of a copy of a computer program covered by such
a licence is exhausted on its first sale. While it is thus
admitted that the distribution right may be subject to
exhaustion in case of computer programs offered for download
with the right holder's consent, the Court was careful to
em­phasise that it reached this decision based on the Computer
Programs Directive. It was stressed that this exhaus­tion rule
constitutedalex specialisin relation to the Information Society
Directive (UsedSoft, par.51, 56).

. This raises difficult questions, notably relating to the
practical application of such an approach (how to avoid
re-sellers keeping and using a copy of a work after they have
"re-sold" it-this is often referred to as the "forward and
de­lete" question) as well as to the economic implications of
the creation of a second-hand mar­ket of copies of perfect
quality that never deteriorate (in contrast to the second-hand
market for physical goods).

13.[In particular if you are an end user/consumer:]Have you
faced restrictions when trying to resell digital files that you
have purchased (e.g. mp3 file, e-book)?

YES-Please explain by giving examples

NO

X NO OPINION

14.[In particular if you are a right holder or a service
provider:] What would be the consequencesof providing a legal
framework enabling the resale of previously purchased digital
content? Please specify per market (type of content) concerned.

[Open question]

Im ErgebniswürdederErschöpfungsgrundsatzerweitert. Die
RechtsinhabermüsstenWeiterverkäufebeim Abgabepreis mit
einkalkulieren. Da die Weiterverbreitung beim erstmaligen
Verkauf nichtüberschaubarwäre(digitale Werke behielten
ihreAnfangsqualität, sie ließen sich mehrfach weitergeben
etc.), könnte der wirtschaftlich erforderliche Abgabepreis
entweder schwer feststellbar sein oder er müsste so hoch
ausfallen,dasser weder für die Erwerber noch für die Veräußerer
akzeptabel wäre (z.B. weil ein Verkauf wegen der hohen
Abgabepreise zurückginge). Der Erschöpfungsgrundsatz ist
deshalb nicht erweiternd, sondern eher restriktiv anzuwenden.
Seine Grundlage entfällt bei digitalen Werken und deren
elektronischer Übermittlung.

C.Registrationof works and other subject matter-is it a good
idea?

Registration is not often discussed in copyright in theEUas the
existing international treaties in the area prohibit
formalities as a condition for the protection and exercise of
rights. How­ever, this prohibition is not absolute26

For example, it does not affect "domestic" works-i.e. works
originating in the country imposing the formali­ties as opposed
to works originating in another country.

. Moreover a system of registrationdoes not need to be made
compulsory or constitute a precondition for the protection and
exercise of rights. With a longer term of protection and with
the increased opportunities that digital technology provides
for the use of content (including older works and works that
otherwise would not have been disseminated), the advantages and
disadvantages of a system of registration are increasingly being
considered27

On the basis of Article3.6of the Directive 2012/28/EU of the
European Parliament and of the Council of25October2012on
certain permitted uses of orphan works, a publicly accessible
online database is currently being set up by the Office
forHarmonisationof the Internal Market (OHIM) for the
registration of orphan works.

.

15.Would the creation of a registration system atEUlevel help in
the identification and licensing of works and other subject
matter?

YES

NO

X NO OPINION

16.What would be the possible advantages of such a system?

[Open question]

...Wenn wirklich ALLE Urheberdaten ohne Diskriminierung und
Kostenbelastung der Kreativen dort zur freien Verfügung
stünden, könnte diese Kenntnis der Rechtsinhaberschaft die
Rechteeinholung durch Nutzer vereinfachen. Allerdings
unternehmen die Verwertunggesellschaften ja bereits sehr viel,
um diesen Service weltweit zu bieten.

17.What would be the possible disadvantages of such a system?

[Open question]

Jede Registrierung istinder Regel mit Kosten und entsprechendem
Aufwand verbunden. Sollte daran gedacht werden, den
Urheberrechtsschutz von einer Registrierung abhängig zu machen,
wäre dies verfehlt; denn den meisten Urhebern wäre es nicht
zumutbar, ihre Werke und ggf. auch die Entwürfe ihrer Werke
sowie weitere Versionen ihrer Werke laufend registrierenzu
lassen. Auch eine geringe Registrierungsgebühr wäre für die
meisten Urheber zu teuer. Eine Registrierung sollte nur auf
freiwilliger Basis stattfinden. Sinnvollerweise sollte hier auf
die bestehenden Werkanmeldungen bei den
Verwertungsgesellschaften zurückgegriffen werden.

Beim Wechsel der Rechteinhaberschaft müsste die Registrierung
laufend aktualisiert werden.

Die Registrierung wäre lückenhaft, weil sie für Werke außerhalb
der EU nicht gilt und für zurückliegende Werke vermutlich nicht
verlangt werdenkann.

Zudem droht die Entstehung von zwei Urheberrechtsklassen (mit
und ohne Registrierung), wobei die Werke von weniger bekannten
Urhebern ins Hintertreffengeraten.

18.What incentives for registration by rightholders could be
envisaged?

[Open question]

Mit der Registrierung könnte die Vermutung der
Rechtsinhaberschaft verbunden werden. Allerdings ist dies
zweischneidig, da die Registrierung von Unberechtigten
missbraucht werden könnte, so dass sich der berechtigte Urheber
gegen die zugunsten des Unberechtigten begründete
Vermutungswirkung zur Wehr setzen müsste.

D.How to improve the use and interoperability ofidentifìers

There are many private databases of works and other subject
matter held by producers, collec­tive management organisations,
and institutions such as libraries, which are based to a greater
or lesser extent on the use of (more or less) interoperable,
internationally agreed 'identifiers'. Identifiers can be
compared to a reference number embedded ina work, are specific
to the sector in which they have been developed28

E.g. the International Standard Recording Code (ISRC) is used to
identify recordings, the International Stan­dard Book Number
(ISBN) is used to identify books.

, and identify, variously, the work itself, the owner or the
contributor to a work or other subject matter. There are
notable examples of where in­dustry is undertaking actions to
improve the interoperability of such identifiers and databases.
The Global Repertoire Database29

Youwill find more information about this initiative on the
following website:http://www.globalrepertoiredatabase.com/.

should, once operational, provide a single source of infor-

mationon the ownership and control of musical works worldwide.
The Linked Content Coali­tion30

Youwill findmore information about this initiative (funded in
part by the European Commission) on the fol­lowing
website:www.linkedcontentcoalition.org.

was established to develop building blocks for the expression
and management of rights and licensing across all content and
media types. It includes the development of a Rights Ref­erence
Model (RRM)-a comprehensive data model for all types of rights
in all types of con­tent. The UK Copyright Hub31

You will find more information about this initiative on the
following website:http://www.copyrighthub.co.uk/.

is seeking to take such identification systems a step further,
and to create a linked platform, enabling automated licensing
across different sectors.

19.What should be the role of theEUin promoting the adoption
ofidentifiers in the content sector, and in promoting the
development and interoperability of rights ownership and
permissions databases?

[Open question]

Wennanein Identifikationssystem gedachtwird, dann sollte es eine
Datenbank auf EU- Ebene sein, die sinnvollerweise zusammen mit
den Verwertungsgesellschaften aufgebaut und abgestimmt werden
könnte. Es sollten dabei nicht nur die Interessen der Medien-
/ Telekommunikationskonzerne und Nutzer imVordergrund stehen,
sondern gleichwertig auch die Interessen der Kreativen und
Autoren. Diesen Schutz der Autoren

gewähren momentan nur die Verwertungsgesellschaften.

E.Term ofprotection-is it appropriate?

Works and other subjectmatter are protected under copyright for
a limited period of time. Af­ter the term of protection has
expired, a work falls into the public domain and can be freely
used by anyone (in accordance with the applicable national
rules on moral rights). The BerneConvention32

Berne Convention for the Protection of Literary and Artistic
Works,http://www.wipo.int/treaties/en/ip/berne/.

requires a minimum term of protection of50years after the death
of the author. TheEUrules extend this term of protection
to70years after the death of the author (as do many other
countries, e.g. the US).

With regard to performers in the music sector and phonogram
producers, the term provided for in theEUrules also
extend20years beyond what is mandated in international
agreements, providing for a term of protection of70years after
the first publication. Performers and pro­ducers in the
audio-visual sector, however, do not benefit from such an
extended term of pro­tection.

20.Are the current terms of copyright protection still
appropriate in the digital envi­ronment?

X YES-Please explain

Schutzfristen setzen einen Anreiz für kreatives Schaffen und für
Investitionen in kreative Inhalte.

Allerdings sollte beim Urhebervertragsrecht geregelt werden,
dass die Urheber an der Verwertung wirtschaftlich angemessen
beteiligt werden, wenn das Werk während der Schutzdauer erneut
oder laufend genutzt wird. Eine Schutzdauer, die sich nach dem
Tod des Urhebers berechnet und70Jahre danach fortgilt, hat
ihren Sinn nur dann, wenn die Urheber und deren nahe Angehörige
eine Vergütung erhalten, solange das Werk genutzt werden kann.

UnterpersönlichkeitsrechtlichenAspekten soll dieLängeder
Schutzfrist dem Umstand Rechnung tragen,dass das Andenken an
den Urheber zwei Generationen fortbesteht.

XNO-Please explain if they should be longer or shorter

Abweichend allerdings auch nein im Hinblick auf die bisher
fehlende Gleichbehandlung. Was für Musikkompositionen mit Text
vereinheitlichend geregelt wurde, sollte auch für andere
Werkverbindungen (z.B. Text mit Illustrationen, Musik und Tanz
oder weitere Verbindungen verschiedener Werkarten) gelten (vgl.
hierzu Art.1Abs.1der Richtlinie 2011/77/EU vom27.09.2011).

Ebenso sollte Art.1Abs.2der Richtlinie 2011/77/EU nicht nur für
Tonträger und ausübende Künstler von Musikaufnahmen, sondern
auch für audiovisuelle Werke

gelten.

□NO OPINION

III.Limitations and exceptionsintheSingle Market

Limitations and exceptions to copyright and related rights
enable the use of works and other protected subject-matter,
without obtaining authorisationfrom the rightholders, for
certain purposes and to a certain extent (for instance the use
for illustration purposes of an extract from a novel by a
teacher in a literature class). AtEUlevel they are established
in a number of copyright directives, mostnotably Directive
2001/29/EC33

Plus Directive 96/9/EC on the legal protection of databases;
Directive 2009/24/EC on the legal protection of computer
programs, and Directive 92/100/EC on rental right and lending
right.

.

Exceptions and limitations in the national andEUcopyright laws
have to respect international law34

Article9(2)of the Berne Convention for the Protection of
Literary and Artistic Works(1971);Article13of the TRIPS
Agreement (Trade Related Intellectual Property
Rights)1994;Article16(2)of theWIPOPerformers and Phonograms
Treaty(1996);Article9(2)of theWIPOCopyright Treaty(1996).

. In accordance with international obligations, theEUacquis
requires that limitations and exceptions can only be applied in
certain special cases which do not conflict with a normal
exploitation of the work or other subject matter and do not
unreasonably prejudice the legiti­mate interest of the
rightholders.

Whereas the catalogue of limitations and exceptions included
inEUlaw is exhaustive (no other exceptions can be applied to
the rights harmonised atEUlevel)35

Other than the grandfathering of the exceptions of minor
importance for analogue uses existing in Member States at the
time of adoption of Directive 2001/29/EC (see, Art. 5(3)(o)).

, these limitations and exceptions are often optional36

With the exception of certain limitations: (i) in the Computer
Programs Directive, (ii) in the Database
Direc­tive,(iii)Article5(1)in the Directive 2001/29/EC
and(iv)the Orphan Works Directive.

, in the sense that Member States are free to reflect in
national legislation as many or as few of them as they wish.
Moreover, the formulation of certain of the limitations and
exceptions is general enough to give significant flexibility to
the Member States as to how, and to what extent, to implement
them (if they decide to do so). Finally, it is worth noting
that not all of the limitations and exceptions included in
theEUlegal framework for copyright are of equivalent
significance inpolicy terms and in terms of their potential
ef­fect on the functioning of the Single Market.

In addition, in the same manner that the definition of the
rights is territorial (i.e. has an effect only within the
territory of the Member State), the definition of the
limitations and exceptions to the rights is territorial too (so
an act that is covered by an exception in a Member State "A"

may still require the authorisation of the rightholder once we
move to the Member State "B")37

Only the exception established in the recent Orphan Works
Directive (a mandatory exception to copyright and related
rights in the case where the rightholders are not known or
cannot be located) has been given across­bordereffect, which
means that, for instance, once a literary work-for instance a
novel-is considered an or­phan work in a Member State, that
same novel shall be considered an orphan work in all Member
States and can be used and accessed in all Member States.

.

The cross-border effect oflimitations and exceptions also raises
the question of fair compen­sation of rightholders. In some
instances, Member States are obliged to compensate
righthold­ers for the harm inflicted on them by a limitation
or exception to their rights. In other in­stances Member States
are not obliged, but may decide, to provide for such
compensation. If a limitation or exception triggering a
mechanism of fair compensation were to be
givencross­bordereffect (e.g. the books are used for
illustration in an online course given by an univer­sity in a
Member State "A" and the students are in a Member State "B")
then there would also be a need to clarify which national law
should determine the level of that compensation and who should
pay it.

Finally, the question of flexibility and adaptability is being
raised: what is the best mechanism to ensure that theEUand
Member States' regulatory frameworks adapt when necessary
(ei­ther to clarify that certain uses are covered by an
exception or to confirm that forcertain uses the authorisation
of rightholders is required)? The main question here is whether
a greater de­gree of flexibility can be introduced in theEUand
Member States regulatory framework while ensuring the required
legal certainty, including for the functioning of the Single
Market, and respecting theEU'sinternational obligations.

21.Are there problems arising from the fact that most
limitations and exceptions pro­vided in theEUcopyright
directives are optional for the Member States?

YES-Please explain by referring to specific casesX NO- Please
explain

Den Bereich der Musik betreffende Ausnahmen und Schranken sind
bereits faktisch weitgehend harmonisiert. Die meisten
Mitgliedstaaten haben die in der Richtlinie

2001/29/EGgestatteten Schrankenbestimmungen auch geschaffen.

NO OPINION

22.Should some/all of the exceptions be made mandatory and, if
so, is there a need for a higher level ofharmonisationof such
exceptions?

X YES- Please explain by referring to specific cases

Nachzudenken wäre über Regelungen bei der Privatkopie.
Allerdings nur, wenn es zu einer definitiven Kompensation der
Autoren z.B. über eine Mindestvergütung kommt.

NO - Please explain

NO OPINION

23.Should any new limitations and exceptions be added to or
removed from the existingcatalogue? Please explain by referring
to specific cases.

[Open question]

Keinesfalls dürfen Schrankenbestimmungen ohne Vergütungsanspruch
geschaffenwerden. Dies wäre eine entschädigungslose Enteignung
der Urheber.

24.Independently from the questions above, is there a need to
provide for a greater de­gree of flexibility in theEUregulatory
framework for limitations and exceptions?

YES-Please explain whyX NO-Please explain why

Eine Flexibilisierung auf nationaler Ebenekönntedas erreichte
Harmonisierungsniveaugefährden und Rechtsunsicherheit schaffen.

NO OPINION

25.If yes, what would be the bestapproach to provide for
flexibility? (e.g. interpretation by national courts and the
ECJ, periodic revisions of the directives, interpretations by
the Commission, built-in flexibility,e.g. inthe form of a
fair-use or fair dealing provision/open norm,etc.)? Please
explain indicating what would be the relative advantages and
dis­advantages of such an approach as well as its possible
effects on the functioning of the In­ternal Market.

[Open question]

26.Does the territoriality of limitations and exceptions, in
your experience, constitute aproblem?

X YES-Please explain why and specify which exceptions you are
referring to

Probleme gibt es hier im Bereich der Privatkopie sowohl
hinsichtlich der Urheber, die in manchen Ländern leer ausgehen,
als auch hinsichtlich der Vergütungsschuldner (z.B.

der Geräteindustrie), die die unterschiedliche Gesetzeslage für
sich ausnutzen.

NO-Please explain why and specify which exceptions you are
referring to

NO OPINION

27.In the event that limitationsand exceptions established at
national level were to have cross-border effect, how should the
question of"fair compensation"be addressed, when such
compensation is part of the exception? (e.g. who pays whom,
where?)

[Open question]

Dieimmer wieder geforderte generelle„FairUse"Ausnahme nach
Vorbild der USA ist abzulehnen. Der Vergleich mit der
Rechtslage in den USA zeigt,dassklar definierte Ausnahmen und
Schrankenbestimmungen einer unbestimmten „Fair Use"-Ausnahme in
den Fragen der Rechtssicherheitund Investitionssicherheit
überlegen sind.Fair Usenützt nur denen, die die Ressourcen
haben, um langwierige Gerichtsverfahren durchzustehen.

A. Accesstocontentin librariesand archives

Directive 2001/29/ECenables MemberStatesto reflect in their
national law a range of limita­tions and exceptions for the
benefit of publicly accessible libraries, educational
establishments and museums, as well as archives. If
implemented, these exceptions allow acts of preservation and
archiving38

Article 5(2)c of Directive2001/29.

and enable on-site consultation of the works and other subject
matter in the collections of such institutions39

Article 5(3)n of Directive2001/29.

. Thepubliclending (under an exception or limitation) by these
establishments of physical copies of works and other subject
matter is governed by the Rental and Lending Directive40

Article5of Directive 2006/115/EC.

.

Questions arise as to whether the current framework continues to
achieve the objectives en­visaged or whether it needs to be
clarified or updated to cover use in digital networks. At the
same time, questions arise as to the effect of such a possible
expansion on the normal exploi­tation of works and other
subject matter and as to the prejudice this may cause to
rightholders. The role of licensing and possible framework
agreements between different stakeholders also needs to be
considered here.

1. Preservation and archiving

The preservation of the copiesof works or other subject-matter
held in the collections of cul­tural establishments (e.g.
books, records, or films)-the restoration or replacement of
works, the copying of fragile works-may involve the creation of
another copy/ies of these works or other subject matter. Most
Member States provide for an exception in their national laws
al­lowing for the making of such preservation copies. The scope
of the exception differs from Member State to Member State (as
regards the type of beneficiary establishments, the types of
works/subject-matter covered by the exception, the mode of
copying and the number of re­productions that a beneficiary
establishment may make). Also, the current legal status of new
types of preservation activities (e.g. harvesting andarchiving
publicly available web content) is often uncertain.

28.(a)[In particular if you are an institutionaluser:]Have you
experienced specific problems when trying to use an exception
to preserve and archive specific works or other subject matter
inyour collection?

(b)[In particular if you are a right holder:]Have you
experienced problems with the use by libraries, educational
establishments, museum or archives of the preservation
exception?

□YES-Please explain, by Member State,sector, and the type of
use in question.

□NO

X NOOPINION

29.If there are problems, how would they best be solved?

[Open question]

30.If your view is that a legislative solution is needed, what
would be its main ele­ments? Which activities of the
beneliciary institutions should be covered and under which
conditions?

[Open question]

31.If your view is that a different solution is needed, what
would it be?

[Open question]

2.Off-premises access to library collections

Directive 2001/29/EC provides an exception for the consultation
of works and other subject- matter (consulting an e-book,
watching a documentary)viadedicated terminals on the prem­ises
of such establishments for the purpose of research and private
study.The online consulta­tion of works and other
subject-matter remotely (i.e. when the library user is not on
the prem­ises of the library) requires authorisation and is
generally addressed in agreements between
universities/libraries and publishers. Some argue that the law
rather than agreements should provide for the possibility to,
and the conditions for, granting online access to collections.

32.(a)[In particular if you are an institutionaluser:]Have you
experienced specific problems when trying to negotiate
agreements with rights holders that enable you to pro­vide
remote access, including across borders, to your collections
(or parts thereof) for pur­poses of research and private study?

[In particular if you are an end user/consumer:]Have you
experienced specific problems when trying to consult, including
across borders, works and other subject-matter held in the
collections of institutions such as universities and national
libraries when you are not on the premises of the institutions
in question?

[In particular if you are a right holder:]Have you negotiated
agreements with institu­tional users that enable those
institutions to provide remote access, including
acrossbor­ders,to the works or other subject-matter in their
collections, for purposes of research and private study?

[Open question]

33.If there are problems, how would they best be solved?

[Open question]

34.If your view is that a legislative solution is needed, what
would be its main ele­ments? Which activities of the
beneficiary institutions should be covered and under which
conditions?

[Open question]

35.If your view is that a different solution is needed, what
would it be?

[Open question]

3.E-lending

Traditionally, public librarieshave loaned physical copies of
works (i.e. books, sometimes also CDs and DVDs) to their users.
Recent technological developments have made it techni­cally
possible for libraries to provide users with temporary access
to digital content, such ase­books,music or films via networks.
Under the current legal framework, libraries need to ob­tain the
authorisation of the rights holders to organise such e-lending
activities. In various Member States, publishers and libraries
are currently experimenting with different business models for
the making available of works online, including direct supply
of e-books to librar­ies by publishers or bundling by
aggregators.

36.(a)[In particular if you are a library:]Have you
experiencedspecificproblems when trying to negotiate agreements
to enable the electronic lending (e-lending), including across
borders, of books or other materials held in your collection?

[In particular if you are an end user/consumer:]Have you
experienced specific problems when trying to borrow books or
other materials electronically (e-lending), including across
borders, from institutions such as public libraries?

[In particular if you are a right holder:]Have you negotiated
agreements with libraries to enable them to lend books or other
materials electronically, including across borders?

□YES-Please explain with specific examples

□NO

X NOOPINION

37.If there are problems, how would they best be solved?

[Open question]

The following two questions are relevant both to this point
(n03)and the previous one (n02).

38.[In particular if you are an institutional user:]What
differences do you see in the management of physical and online
collections, including providing access to your sub­scribers?
What problems have you encountered?

[Open question]

39.[In particular if you are a right holder:]What difference do
youseebetween librar­ies'traditional activities such as
on-premises consultation or public lending and activities such
as off-premises (online, at a distance) consultation and
e-lending? What problems have you encountered?

[Open question]

4.Mass digitisation

The term "mass digitisation" is normally used to refer to
efforts by institutions such as librar­ies and archives to
digitise (e.g. scan) the entirecontent or part of their
collections with an ob­jective to preserve these collections
and, normally, to make them available to the public. Ex­amples
are efforts by libraries to digitise novels form the early part
of the 20thcentury or whole collections of pictures of
historical value. This matter has been partly addressed at
theEUlevel by the2011Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) on key
principles on the digiti­sation and making available of out of
commerce works (i.e. works which are no longerfound in the
normal channels of commerce), which is aiming to facilitate
mass digitisation efforts (for books and learned journals) on
the basis of licence agreements between libraries and similar
cultural institutions on the one hand and the collecting
societies representing authors and publishers on the other41

ou will find more information about his MoU on the following
website:http://ec.europa.eu/internalmarket/copyright/out-of-commerce/index
en.htm.

. Provided the required funding is ensured (digitisation
projects are extremely expensive), the result of this MoU
should be that books that are currently to be found only in the
archives of, for instance, libraries will be digitised and made
available online to everyone. The MoU is based on voluntary
licences (granted by Collective Manage­ment Organisations on
the basis of the mandates they receive from authors and
publishers). Some Member States may need to enact legislation
to ensure the largest possible effect of such licences (e.g. by
establishing in legislation a presumption of representation of a
collecting society or the recognition of an "extended effect" to
the licences granted)42

France and Germany have already adopted legislation to back the
effects of the MoU. The French act(LOInO
2012-287du1ermars2012relativeà l'exploitation numérique des
livres indisponibles du xxe siècle)foresees collective
management, unless the author or publisher in question opposes
such management. The German act(Gesetz zur Nutzung verwaister
und vergriffener Werke und einer weiteren Änderung des
Urheberrechtsgesetzes
vom1.Oktober2013)containsalegalpresumption of representationby
a collecting society in relation to works whose rightholders
are not members of the collecting society.

.

40.[In particular if you are an institutional user, engaging or
wanting to engage in massdigitisation projects, a right holder,
a collective management organisation:]Would it be nec­essary in
your country to enact legislation to ensure that the results of
the2011MoU (i.e. the agreements concluded between libraries and
collecting societies) have across­bordereffect so that out of
commerce works can be accessed across theEU?

□YES-Please explain why and how it could best be achieved

□NO-Please explain

X NOOPINION

Wouldit be necessary to develop mechanisms,beyond those already
agreed for other types of content (e.g. for audio- or
audio-visual collections, broadcasters'archives)?

X YES-Please explain

Ja, z.B. für audiovisuelle Werke.

NO-Please explain

NO OPINION

B. Teaching

Directive 2001/29/EC43

Article 5(3)a of Directive2001/29.

enables Member States to implement in their national legislation
limi­tations and exceptions for the purpose of illustration for
non-commercial teaching. Such ex­ceptions would typically allow
a teacher to use parts of or full works to illustrate his
course, e.g. by distributing copies of fragments of a book or
of newspaper articles in the classroom or by showing protected
content on a smart board without having toobtain authorisation
from the right holders. The open formulation of this (optional)
provision allows for rather different implementation at Member
States level. The implementation of the exception differs from
Member State to Member State, with several Member States
providing instead a framework for the licensing of content for
certain educational uses. Some argue that the law should
pro­vide for better possibilities for distance learning and
study at home.

(a)[In particular if you are an end user/consumer or an
institutional user:]Have you experienced specific problems when
trying to use works or other subject-matter for illustra­tion
for teaching, including across borders?

(b)[In particular if you are a right holder:]Have you
experienced specific problems result­ing from theway inwhich
works or other subject-matter are used for illustration for
teach­ing including across borders?

YES-Please explain

□NO

XNOOPINION

43.If there are problems, how would they best be solved?

[Open question]

44.Whatmechanisms exist in the market place to facilitate the
use of content for illus­tration for teaching purposes? How
successful are they?

[Open question]

45.If your view is that a legislative solution is needed, what
would be its main ele­ments? Which activities of the
beneficiary institutions should be covered and under what
conditions?

[Open question]

46.If your view is that a different solution is needed, what
would it be?

[Open question]

C. Research

Directive 2001/29/EC44

Article 5(3)a of Directive2001/29.

enables Member States to choose whether to implement in their
na­tional laws a limitation for the purpose of non-commercial
scientific research. The open for­mulation of this (optional)
provision allows for rather different implementations at Member
States level.

47.(a)[In particular if you are an end user/consumer or an
institutional user:]Have you experienced specific problems when
trying to use works or other subject matter in thecon­textof
research projects/activities, including across borders?

(b)[In particular if you are a right holder:]Have you
experienced specific problems result­ing from theway inwhich
works or other subject-matter are used in the context of
research projects/activities, including across borders?

□YES-Please explain

□NO

X NOOPINION

48.If there are problems, how would they best be solved?

[Open question]

49.What mechanisms exist in the Member States to facilitate the
use of content for re­search purposes? How successful are they?

[Open question]

D. Disabilities

Directive 2001/29/EC45

Article5(3)b of Directive2001/29.

provides for an exception/limitationfor the benefit of people
with a disability. The open formulation of this (optional)
provision allows for rather different im­plementations at
Member States level. AtEUand international level projectshave
been launched to increase the accessibility of works and other
subject-matter for persons with dis­abilities (notably by
increasing the number of works published in special formats and
facilitat­ing their distribution across the European Union)46

The European Trusted Intermediaries Network (ETIN) resulting
from a Memorandum of Understanding be­tween representatives of
the right-holder community (publishers, authors, collecting
societies) and interested parties  such  as  associations  for
blind  and  dyslexic
persons(http://ec.europa.eu/internalmarket/copyright/initiatives/access/index
en.htm)and the Trusted IntermediaryGlobal Accessible
Resources(TIGAR)project
inWIPO(http://www.visionip.org/portal/en/).

.

The Marrakesh Treaty47

Marrakesh Treaty to Facilitate Access to Published Works by
Visually Impaired Persons and Persons with Print Disabilities,
Marrakesh, June17to28 2013.

has been adopted to facilitate access to published works for
persons who are blind, visually impaired, or otherwise print
disabled. The Treaty creates a mandatory exception to copyright
that allows organisations for the blind to produce, distribute
and make available accessible format copies to visually
impaired persons without the authorisation of the rightholders.
TheEUand its Member States have started work to sign and ratify
the Treaty. This may require the adoption of certain provisions
atEUlevel (e.g. to ensure the pos­sibility to exchange
accessible format copies across borders).

50.(a)[In particular if you are a person with a disability or an
organisation representingpersons with disabilities:]Have you
experienced problems with accessibility to content, in­cluding
across borders, arising from Member States'implementation of
this exception?

[In particular if you are an organisation providing services for
persons with disabilities:]Have you experienced problems when
distributing/communicating works published in spe­cial formats
across theEU?

[In particular if you are a right holder:]Have you experienced
specific problems result­ing from the application of
limitations or exceptions allowing for the
distribu­tion/communication of works published inspecial
formats, including across borders?

□YES-Please explain by giving examples

□NO

X NOOPINION

51.If there are problems, what could be done to improve
accessibility?

[Open question]

52.What mechanisms exist in themarket place to facilitate
accessibility to content? How successful are they?

[Open question]

E. Text and data mining

Text and data mining/content mining/data analytics48

For the purpose of the presentdocument, the term "text and data
mining" will be used.

are different terms used to describe in­creasingly important
techniques used in particular by researchers for the
exploration of vast amounts of existing texts and data (e.g.,
journals, web sites, databases etc.). Through the use of
software or other automated processes, an analysis is made of
relevant texts and data in or­der to obtain new insights,
patterns and trends.

The texts and data used for mining are either freely accessible
on the internetor accessible through subscriptions to e.g.
journals and periodicals that give access to the databases of
pub­lishers. A copy is made of the relevant texts and data
(e.g. on browser cache memories or in computers RAM memories or
onto the hard disk of a computer), prior to the actual analysis.
Normally, it is considered that to mine protected works or other
subject matter, it is necessary to obtain authorisation from the
right holders for the making of such copies unless such
au­thorisation can be implied (e.g. content accessible to
general public without restrictions on the internet, open
access).

Some argue that the copies required for text and data mining are
covered by the exception for temporary copies in Article5.1of
Directive 2001/29/EC. Others consider that text and data mining
activities should not even be seen as covered by copyright. None
of this is clear, in particular since text and data mining does
not consist only of a single method, but can be un­dertaken in
several different ways. Importantquestions also remain as to
whether the main problems arising in relation to this issue go
beyond copyright (i.e. beyond the necessity or not to obtain
the authorisation to use content) and relate rather to the need
to obtain "access" to content (i.e. being able to use e.g.
commercial databases).

A specific Working Group was set up on this issue in the
framework of the "Licences for Europe" stakeholder dialogue. No
consensus was reached among participating stakeholders on either
the problems to be addressed or the results. At the same time,
practical solutions to facilitate text and data mining of
subscription-based scientific content were presented by
pub­lishers as an outcome of "Licences for Europe"49

See the document "Licences for Europe-ten pledges to bring more
content
online":http://ec.europa.eu/internalmarket/copyright/docs/licences-for-europe/131113
ten-pledges en.pdf.

. In the context of these discussions, other stakeholders argued
that no additional licences should be required to mine material
to which access has been provided through a subscription
agreement and considered that a specific ex­ception for text
and data mining should be introduced, possibly on the basis of
a distinction between commercial and non-commercial.

53.(a)[In particular if you are an end user/consumer or an
institutional user:]Have you experienced obstacles, linked to
copyright, when trying to use text or data mining methods,
including across borders?

[In particular if you are a service provider:]Have you
experienced obstacles, linked to copyright, when providing
services based on text or data mining methods, including across
borders?

[In particular if you are a right holder:]Have you
experiencedspecific problems result­ing from the use of text
and data mining in relation to copyright protected content,
includ­ing across borders?

□YES-Please explain

□NO-Please explain

X NOOPINION

54.If there are problems, how would they best be solved?

[Open question]

55.If your view is that a legislative solution is needed, what
would be its main ele­ments? Which activities should be covered
and under what conditions?

[Open question]

56.If your view is that a different solution is needed, what
would it be?

[Open question]

57.Are there other issues, unrelated to copyright, that
constitute barriers to the use of text or data mining methods?

[Open question]

F. User-generated content

Technological and service developments mean that citizens can
copy, use and distribute con­tent at little to no financial
cost. As a consequence, new types of online activities are
develop­ing rapidly, including the making of so-called
"user-generated content". While users can cre­ate totally
original content, they can also take one or several
pre-existing works, change some­thing in the work(s), and
upload the result on the Internet e.g. to platforms andblogs50

A typical example could bethe "kitchen" or "wedding" video
(adding one's own video to a pre-existing sound recording), or
adding one's own text to a pre-existing photograph. Other
examples are "mash-ups" (blending two sound recordings), and
reproducing parts of journalistic work (report, review etc.)
ina blog.

.User­generatedcontent (UGC) can thus cover the modification of
pre-existing works even if the newly-generated/"uploaded" work
does not necessarily require a creative effort and results from
merely adding, subtracting or associating some pre-existing
content with other pre­existing content. This kind of activity
is not "new" as such. However, the development of so­cial
networking and social media sites that enable users to share
content widely has vastly changed the scale of such activities
and increased the potential economic impact for those holding
rights in the pre-existing works. Re-use is no longer the
preserve of a technically and artistically adept elite. With
the possibilities offered by the new technologies, re-useis
open to all, at no cost. This in turn raises questions with
regard to fundamental rights such the free­dom of expression
and the right to property.

A specific Working Group was set up on this issue in the
framework of the "Licences for Europe" stakeholder dialogue. No
consensus was reached among participating stakeholders on either
the problems to be addressed or the results or even the
definition of UGC. Neverthe­less, a wide range of views were
presented as to the best way to respond to this phenomenon. One
view was to say that a new exception is needed to cover UGC, in
particularnon­commercialactivities by individuals such as
combining existing musical works with videos, sequences of
photos, etc. Another view was that no legislative change is
needed: UGC is flourishing, and licensing schemes are
increasingly available (licence schemes concluded be-

tween rightholdersand platforms as well as micro-licences
concluded between rightholders and the users generating the
content. In any event, practical solutions to ease
user-generated content and facilitate micro-licensing for small
users were pledged by rightholders across dif­ferent sectors as
a result of the "Licences for Europe" discussions51

See the document "Licences for Europe-ten pledges to bringmore
content
online":http://ec.europa.eu/intemalmarket/copyright/docs/licences-for-europe/131113
ten-pledges en.pdf.

.

58.(a)[In particular if you are an end user/consumer:]Have you
experienced problemswhen trying to use pre-existing works or
other subject matter to disseminate new content on the
Internet, including across borders?

[In particular if you are a service provider:]Have you
experienced problems when users publish/disseminate new content
based on the pre-existing works or other subject-matter through
your service, including across borders?

[In particular if you are a right holder:]Have you experienced
problemsresulting from the way the users are using pre-existing
works or other subject-matter to disseminate new content on the
Internet, including across borders?

X YES-Please explain by giving examples

Keine Vergütung, wenn Musik z.B. auf Youtube von Drittenin UGC
genutzt wird.

NO

NO OPINION

59.(a)[Inparticular if you are an end user/consumer or a right
holder:]Have you ex­perienced problemswhen trying to ensure
that the work you have created (on the basis of pre-existing
works) is properly identified for online use? Are proprietary
systems sufficient in this context?

(b)[In particular if you are a service provider:]Do you provide
possibilities for users that are publishing/disseminating the
works they have created (on the basis of pre-existing works)
through your service to properly identify these works for
online use?

□YES-Please explain

□NO-Please explain

XNOOPINION

60.(a)[In particular if you are an end user/consumer or a right
holder):]Have you ex­perienced problems when trying to be
remunerated for the use of the work you have created(on the
basis of pre-existing works)?

(b)[In particular if you are a service provider:]Do you provide
remuneration schemes for users publishing/disseminating the
works they have created (on the basis of pre-existing works)
through your service?

□YES-Please explain

□NO-Please explain

X]noopinion

61.If there are problems, how would they best be solved?

[Open question]

BeiUser-generated content (UGC)kommen zahlreiche verschiedene
Interessen zusammen.

Auch was privat genutzt werden soll, geschieht meistens
öffentlich, weil der UGC ins Netz gestellt wird und jede
private Website in der Regel weltweit abrufbar ist. Es geht
also nicht um private Nutzungen, sondern um urheberrechtlich
relevante Vorgänge (Vervielfältigung, öffentliche
Zugänglichmachung etc.). Das gilt erst recht, wenn
kommerzielle Zwecke verfolgt werden. Betroffen sind deshalb all
diejenigen, die die Werke den Endverbrauchern wahrnehmbar machen
oder daran mitwirken, insbesondere Plattformbetreiber; denn
selbst wenn die Dienste solcher Plattformen von Privatleuten
genutzt werden, agieren doch die Plattformbetreiber durchweg
kommerziell. Sie sollten sich die erforderlichen Rechte von den
Verwertungsgesellschaften und den sonstigen Rechtsinhabern
beschaffen müssen, wenn es die nicht kommerziell handelnden
Nutzer dieser Plattformennicht tun (und das Geschäftsmodell der
Plattformbetreiber auch gar nicht vorsieht, dass die Nutzer es
tun).

Außerdem sollte unter dem Begriff UGC nicht gezählt werden, was
unter dessen Deckmantel einfach nur unverändert und ohne
Einwilligung der Rechtsinhaber genutzt wird. Werden fremde
Werke unverändert genutzt, müssen hierfür die einschlägigen
Nutzungsrechte erworben werden.

Werden die Werke in veränderter Form genutzt, sind die
Urheberpersönlichkeitsrechte zu beachten. In der Regel werden
entsprechende Bearbeitungsrechte ebenfalls von den
Rechtsinhabern erworben werden müssen. Anders könnte es sich
verhalten, wenn fremde Werke nur als Anregung für eigenes
Werkschaffen dienen. Das setzt abervoraus,dassder Nutzer das
fremde Werk weder ganz noch in Teilen übernimmt, sondern sich
nur von dem Werk anregen lässt, um etwas Eigenständiges und
Individuelles zu schaffen. Diese Eigenständigkeit muss so weit
reichen, dass das Werk, von dem sich der Nutzer anregen ließ,
hinter dem neu entstandenen Werk verblasst.

Grundsätzlich muss auch hier bei kommerziellen Nutzungen an eine
Vergütungspflicht gedacht werden.

If your view is that a legislative solution is needed, what
would be its main ele­ments?Which activities should be covered
and under what conditions?

[Open question]

If your view is that a different solution is needed, what would
it be?

[Open question]

SiehedieAusführungen zu Frage61.

IV.Private copying and reprography

Directive 2001/29/EC enables Member States to implement in their
national legislation excep­tions or limitations to the
reproduction right for copies made for private use and
photocopy­ing52

Article5.2)(a)and(b)of Directive2001/29.

. Levies are charges imposed at national level on goods
typically used for such purposes (blank media, recording
equipment, photocopying machines, mobile listening devices such
as mp3/mp4 players, computers, etc.) with a view to compensating
rightholders for the harm they suffer when copies are made
without their authorisation by certain categories of persons
(i.e. natural persons making copies for their private use) or
through use of certain technique (i.e. reprography). In that
context, levies are important for rightholders.

With the constant developments in digital technology, the
question arises as to whether the copying of files by
consumers/end-users who have purchased content online-e.g. when
a person has bought an MP3 fileand goes on to store multiple
copies of that file (in her com­puter, her tablet and her
mobile phone)-also triggers, or should trigger, the application
of private copying levies. It is argued that, in some cases,
these levies may indeed be claimed by rightholders whether or
not the licence fee paid by the service provider already covers
copies made by the end user. This approach could potentially
lead to instances of double payments whereby levies could be
claimed on top of service providers' licence fees5657.

There is also an on-going discussion as to the application or
not of levies to certain types of cloud-based services such as
personal lockers or personal video recorders.

64.In your view, is there a need to clarify at theEUlevel the
scope and application of the private copying and reprography
exceptions53

Art. 5.2(a) and 5.2(b) of Directive 2001/29/EC.

in the digital environment?

□YES-Please explainX NO- Please explain

WerdiePrivatkopie abschaffen oder im digitalen Bereich
durch„Lizenzlösungen" ersetzen will, schafft nicht nur die
Vergütungspflicht für Hersteller ab, sondern nimmt dem privaten
Verbraucher die Freiheit, geschützte Werke im privaten Bereich
nach

Belieben zu vervielfältigen.  □NO OPINION

65.Should digital copies made by end users for private purposes
in the context of a service that has been licensed by
rightholders, and where the harm to the rightholder is minimal,
be subject to private copying levies?54

This issue was also addressed in the recommendations of Mr
AntonioVitorinoresulting from the mediation on private copying
and reprography levies

X YES-Please explain

Gesetzliche Vergütungsansprüche wiediePrivatkopie verbinden
Rechtssicherheit für Diensteanbieter und Verbraucher mit
geringen Transaktionskosten. Insofern ist die

Privatkopie voll kompatibel mit neuen digitalen
Geschäftsmodellen.

NO-Please explain

NO OPINION

66.How would changes in levies withrespect to the application to
online services (e.g. services based on cloud computing
allowing, for instance, users to have copies on different
devices) impact the development and functioning of new business
models on the one hand and rightholders'revenue on the other?

[Open question]

DiePrivatkopie bietet Vorteile für Verbraucher und Rechteinhaber
und hat sich als System grundsätzlich bewährt. Dennoch ist es
richtig,dassdie Privatkopie im digitalen Bereich durch
Lizenzmodelle ergänzt (aber nichtersetzt) werden kann. Beide
Systeme können komplementär sein. Der EU-Rechtsrahmen sollte
die Koexistenz beider Systeme zulassen.

67.Would you seeanadded value in making levies visible on the
invoices for products subject to levies?55

This issue was also addressed in the recommendations of Mr
AntonioVitorinoresulting from the mediation on private copying
and reprography levies.

X YES-Please explain

...Es erscheint aus Gründen der Transparenz sinnvoll,dassGeräte-
undSpeichermedienvergütungenauf den einschlägigen Rechnungen
ausgewiesen werden. Es müsste allerdings sichergestellt
werden,dassnur die tatsächlich an die jeweilige
Verwertungsgesellschaft geleisteten Beträge angegeben werden;
also z.B. die Beträge nach Abzug eines
Gesamtvertragsnachlasses.

NO-Please explain

NO OPINION

Diverging national systems levy different products and apply
different tariffs. This results in obstacles to the free
circulation of goods and servicesin the Single Market. At the
same time, many Member States continue to allow the
indiscriminate application of private copying lev­ies to all
transactions irrespective of the person to whom the product
subject to a levy is sold

(e.g. private person or business). In that context, not all
Member States have ex ante exemp­tion and/or ex post
reimbursement schemes which could remedy these situations and
reduce the number of undue payments56

This issue was also addressed in the recommendations of Mr
AntonioVitorinoresulting from the mediation on private copying
and reprography levies.

.

68.Have you experienced a situation where a cross-border
transaction resulted in un­due levy payments, or duplicate
payments of the same levy, or other obstacles to the free
movement of goods or services?

□YES-Please specify the type of transaction and indicate the
percentage of the undue pay­ments. Please also indicate how a
priori exemption and/or ex post reimbursement schemes could
help to remedy the situation.

□NO-Please explain

X NOOPINION

69.What percentage of products subject to a levy is sold to
persons other than natural persons for purposes clearly
unrelated to private copying? Do any of those transactions
re­sult in undue payments? Please explain in detailthe example
you provide (type of products, type of transaction,
stakeholders, etc.).

[Open question]

70.Where such undue payments arise, what percentage of trade do
they affect? To what extent could a priori exemptions and/or ex
post reimbursement schemesexisting in some Member States help to
remedy the situation?

[Open question]

71.If you have identified specific problems with the current
functioning of the levy sys­tem, how would these problems best
be solved?

[Open question]

V.Fair remuneration of authors and performers

TheEUcopyright acquis recognises for authors and performers a
number of exclusive rights and, in the case of performers whose
performances are fixed in phonograms, remuneration rights. There
are few provisions in theEUcopyright law governing thetransferof
rights from authors or performers to producers57

Seee.g. Directive92/100/EEC, Art.2(4)-(7).

or determining who the owner of the rights is when the work or
other subject matter is created in thecontext of an employment
contract58

Seee.g.Art.2.3.of Directive2009/24/EC, Art.4of Directive96/9/EC.

. This is an area that has been traditionally left for Member
States to regulate and there are significant dif­ferences in
regulatory approaches.Substantial differences also exist
between different sectors of the creative industries.

Concerns continue to be raised that authors and performers are
not adequately remunerated, in particular but not solely, as
regards online exploitation. Many considerthat the economic
benefit of new forms of exploitation is not being fairly shared
along the whole value chain. Another commonly raised issue
concerns contractual practices, negotiation mechanisms,
pre­sumptions of transfer of rights, buy-out clauses and the
lack of possibility to terminate con­tracts. Some stakeholders
are of the opinion that rules at national level do not suffice
to im­prove their situation and that action atEUlevel is
necessary.

72.[In particular if you are an author/performer:] What is the
best mechanism (or com­bination of mechanisms) to ensure that
you receive an adequate remuneration for the ex­ploitation of
your works and performances?

[Open question]

Die kollektive Rechtewahrnehmungdurch nicht auf Gewinnerzielung
ausgerichtete Verwertungsgesellschaften ist der beste
Garantdafür,dass die Interessen von Urhebern ineinem sich
entwickelnden europäischen Binnenmarkt für geistige
Eigentumsrechte angemessen vertreten werden und eine effiziente
Lizenzvergabe an Musiknutzer aller Art gewährleistet bleibt.

Angesichts der Nachfragemacht der großen, international
agierenden Musiknutzer im Online-Bereich sind
Verwertungsgesellschaften wichtiger denn je, um in
Verhandlungen mit Nutzern eine faire Vergütung für die Urheber
auszuhandeln.

Durch die treuhänderische Verwaltung der Urheber- und
Leistungsschutzrechte all ihrer eigenen Mitglieder und der
Mitglieder der von ihnen vertretenen ausländischen
Verwertungsgesellschaften nehmen Verwertungsgesellschaften
sowohl international gefragtes als auch Nischenrepertoire zu
gleichen Bedingungen wahr. Auf diese Weise ermöglichen sie
gerade weniger bekannten Autoren einen gleichberechtigten
Marktzugang und leisten einen wichtigen Beitrag zur kulturellen
Vielfalt.

Soweit Werke im Rahmen gesetzlicher Schranken genutzt werden,
sollten in der Regel gesetzliche Vergütungsansprüche vorgesehen
sein, die nur über Verwertungsgesellschaften kassiert und an die
Urheber und Rechtsinhaber verteilt werden dürfen. Letzteresist
erforderlich, damit den Urhebern diese Beteiligung nicht auf
vertraglichem Wege abbedungen werden kann.

Deshalb sollten diese Ansprüche unverzichtbar und nur an eine
Verwertungsgesellschaft abtretbar sein. Es müsste allerdings im
Zusammenhang mit denRegelungen für Verwertungsgesellschaften
hinreichend abgesichert werden, dass den Urhebern die

angemessene Beteiligung tatsächlich zufließt.

Soweit Werke nicht im Rahmen gesetzlicher Schranken oder durch
Verwertungsgesellschaften genutzt werden, sondernhierfürdie
Rechte individuellVerwertern eingeräumt werden, müsste ein
Urhebervertragsrecht geregelt werden. Dieses
Urhebervertragsrecht sollte einen Beteiligungsgrundsatz
vorsehen, wonach den Urhebern für jede einzelne Nutzung ihrer
Werke eine angemessene Vergütung zu leisten ist.

Generell sei hier auf die§§ 31bis44des deutschen
Urheberrechtsgesetzes hingewiesen. Ein bewährtes Mittel, eine
angemessene Vergütung für den Urheber und ausübenden Künstler
aufgrund ihrer Ausschließlichkeitsrechte sicherzustellen, ist
das Modell, das in Art.4der EG-Vermiet-Richtlinie (Art.5in der
konsolidierten Fassung von2006)verwirklicht ist. Demnach behält
der Urheber/ausübende Künstler nach Einräumung bzw. Abtretung
seines ausschließlichen Rechts an den Produzenten aufgrund
Gesetzes einen Anspruch auf angemessene Vergütung, der
unverzichtbar ist. Dieses in der Richtlinie auf das
Vermietrecht beschränkte Modell könnte auch auf andere Rechte
und im Verhältnis zu anderen Verwertern angewendetwerden, so
wie es in Deutschland auch schon für das
Kabelweiterleitungsrecht vorgesehen ist. Dieser Anspruch auf
angemessene Vergütung sollte wie in Deutschland, idealerweise
nur durch eine Verwertungsgesellschaft geltend gemacht werden
können. Er sollteprimär gegenüber dem Nutzer des
ausschließlichen Rechts (z.B. dem Vermieter), zusätzlich aber
auchgegenüber dem Verwerter (z.B. dem Produzenten) bestehen.

73.Is there a need to act at theEUlevel (for instance to
prohibit certain clauses in con­tracts)?

X YES-Please explain

Meistens müssen Urheber ihre Rechte für die Dauer der
Schutzfrist, also zeitlich unbegrenzt, einräumen. Das mag dort
akzeptabel sein, wo sie laufend an der Nutzung ihrer Werke
wirtschaftlich beteiligt werden. Häufig werden jedoch nur
einmalige Pauschalbeträge gezahlt. Das ist mit einer zeitlich
unbegrenzten Rechtseinräumung unvereinbar. Deshalb sollten
Rechte nur für eine bestimmte Zeit eingeräumt werden können,
und zwar mit der Option, diesen Zeitraum-ggf. mehrfach-um einen
weiteren bestimmten Zeitraum verlängern zu können, aber nur
gegen entsprechende Vergütung. Die Regelungmussso beschaffen
sein,dassdem Urheber diese Vergütung im Falle der Verlängerung
garantiert wird.

NO-Please explain why

NO OPINION

74.If youconsider that the current rules are not effective, what
would you suggest to address the shortcomings you identify?

[Open question]

Es ist allgemein anerkannt, dass der Urheber bei
Vertragsverhandlungen diegegenüber den
VerwerternseinerWerkedieschwächere Partei ist. Häufigmusser
vorformulierte Vertragsmuster unterschreiben, ohne die
Möglichkeit zu haben, abweichende Regelungen treffen zu
können. Nicht selten sehen diese Vertragsmuster Klauseln
(allgemeine Geschäftsbedingungen) vor, wonach sichdie Verwerter
sämtlicher nur denkbaren Rechte einräumen lassen, ohne den
Urheber für all diese Nutzungen

angemessen zu vergüten. Esmussdeshalb eine Kontrolle dieser
Vertragsklauseln bestehen. Da die Urheber in der Regel selbst
wirtschaftlich und auch taktisch (sie bekommen nie wieder einen
Job, wenn sie gegen ihre Vertragspartner klagen) nicht in der
Lage sind, ihre Ansprüche gegenüber den Verwertern
durchzusetzen,musses den Urheberverbänden gestattet sein,
derartige Klauseln gerichtlich überprüfen zulassen. Als
Beispiel sei die sogenannte "Zwangsinverlagnahme" genannt, bei
der eine Kompositions-Auftragsvergabe an die Abtretung von
Verlagsrechten an einen mit demAuftraggeber wirtschaftlich
verbundenen Verlag gekoppelt wird.

VI.Respect forrights

Directive2004/48/EE59

Directive 2004/48/EC of the European Parliament and of the
Council of29April2004on the enforcement of intellectual
property rights.

provides for a harmonised framework for the civil enforcement of
in­tellectualproperty rights, including copyright and related
rights. The Commission has con­sulted broadly on this text60

You will find more information on the following website:

http://ec.europa.eu/internal
market/iprenforcement/directive/index en.htm

. Concerns have been raised as to whether some of its provisions
are still fit to ensure a proper respect for copyright in the
digital age. On the one hand, the cur­rent measures seem to be
insufficient to deal with the new challenges brought by the
dissemi­nation of digital content on the internet; on the other
hand, there are concerns about the cur­rent balance between
enforcement of copyright and the protection of fundamental
rights, in particular the right for a private life and data
protection. While it cannot be contested that en­forcement
measures should always be available in case of infringement of
copyright, meas­ures could be proposed to strengthen respect
for copyright when the infringed content is used for a
commercial purpose61

For example whenthe infringing content is offered on a website
which gets advertising revenues that depend on the volume of
traffic.

. One means to do this could be to clarify the role of
intermediaries in the IP infrastructure62

This clarification should not affect theliability regime of
intermediary service providers established by Direc­tive
2000/31/EC on electronic commerce, which will remain unchanged.

. At the same time, there couldbe clarification of the
safeguards for respect of private life and data protection for
private users.

75.Should the civil enforcement system in theEUbe rendered more
efficient for in­fringements of copyright committed with a
commercial purpose?

X YES-Please explain

Verbesserungen bei der Rechtsdurchsetzung von
Urheberrechtenmüssenauf der Ebene der kommerziellen
Plattformbetreiber ansetzen.

Es darf insbesondere keine Haftungsprivilegierung für
Host-Provider geben, die an der Verwertung kreativer Inhalte
wirtschaftlich partizipieren.

Ein besserer Schutz muss auch bei der Regelung der
urheberrechtlichen Nutzungshandlungen ansetzen, deren
Verletzung dann auf dieser Basis zivilrechtlich

verfolgt werden kann.

NO-Please explain

NO OPINION

76.In particular, is the current legal framework clear enough to
allow for sufficient involvement of intermediaries (such as
Internet service providers, advertising brokers,

payment service providers, domain name registrars, etc.) in
inhibiting online copyright in­fringements with a commercial
purpose? If not, what measures would be useful to foster the
cooperation of intermediaries?

[Open question]

Host-Provider, diesystematische Rechtsverletzungen ermöglichen
und damit in Konkurrenz zu lizenzierten Content-Providern
treten, müssen stärker als bisher in die Verantwortung genommen
werden.

Im Urheberrechtsgesetz sollte klargestellt werden,dassdie
Wahrnehmbarmachung fremderWerke ebenfalls eine urheberrechtlich
relevante Nutzungshandlung ist, wenn auf diesem Wege (z.B. durch
sogenannte Bannerwerbung) kommerzielle Zweckeverfolgt werden.

77.Does the currentcivilenforcement framework ensure that the
right balance is achieved between the right to have one's
copyright respected and other rights such as the protection of
private life and protection of personal data?

YES-Please explainX NO- Please explain

Diebestehenden Regelungen zurHaftungsprivilegierungsind zu
undifferenziert und bedürfen daher der Reform.

Der Ansatz einer Selbstregulierung hat bisher zu keiner Lösung
geführt.

NO OPINION

VII.A single EU CopyrightTitle

Theideaof establishingaunifiedEU CopyrightTitle has been present
in the copyright debate for quite some time now, although views
as to the merits and the feasibility of such an objec­tive are
divided. A unifiedEUCopyright Title would totally harmonise the
area of copyright law in theEUand replace national laws. There
would then be a singleEUtitle instead of a bundle of national
rights. Some see this as the only manner in which a truly
Single Market for content protected by copyright can be
ensured, while others believe that the same objectivecan better
be achieved by establishing a higher level ofharmonisationwhile
allowing for a certain degree of flexibility and specificity in
Member States' legal systems.

78.Should theEUpursue the establishment of a singleEUCopyright
Title, as a means of establishing a consistent framework for
rights and exceptions to copyright across theEU,as well as a
single framework for enforcement?

YES

NO

X NOOPINION

Nur sinnvoll, wenn nicht um jeden Preis und auf höchstem
Schutzlevel für die Urheber! Das wäre nur erreichbar, wenn an
dem Schöpferprinzip festgehalten wird. Im Mittelpunkt steht der
Urheber als natürliche Person, die individuelle Werke schaffen
kann. Seine ideellen Interessen sind durch Regelungen des
Urheberpersönlichkeitsrecht zu wahren. Seine wirtschaftlichen
Interessen müssen u.a. durch ein hinreichendes
Urhebervertragsrecht gewährleistet werden.

Keinesfalls darf eine Harmonisierung zu Lasten der Urheber
ausfallen, und diese Gefahr ist durch die Übermacht der
Verwerter und Netzbetreiber in starkem Maßgegeben.

79.Should this be the next step in the development of copyright
in theEU?Does the current level of difference among the Member
State legislation mean that this is a longer term project?

[Open question]

VIII.Other issues

The above questionnaire aims to provide a comprehensive
consultation on the most important matters relating to the
currentEUlegal framework for copyright. Should any important
mat­ters have been omitted, we would appreciate if you could
bring them to our attention, so they can be properly addressed
in the future.

80.Are there any other important matters related to theEUlegal
framework for copy­right?Please explain and indicate how such
matters should be addressed.

[Open question]

Bisher fallen unter die urheberrechtlichen Verwertungsrechte nur
die dem Werkgenussvorgelagerten Nutzungshandlungen
(Vervielfältigung, Verbreitung, Sendung etc.). Der Werkgenuss
selbst ist zwar eine Nutzung, sie wird aber in den
Gesetzestexten nicht ausdrücklich erwähnt und durch die
Formulierung der Verwertungsrechte freigestellt. Dabei ist das
Lesen, Hören, Betrachten oder sonstige Wahrnehmen der Werke die
eigentliche Nutzungshandlung, deretwegen die ihr vorgelagerten
Nutzungshandlungen (Vervielfältigung, Verbreitung etc.)
unternommen werden und für die der Endverbraucher letztlich
auch bezahlen muss. Mittlerweile verlagern sich die
Nutzungshandlungen weg von der Verbreitung körperlicher
Werkexemplare hin zur bloßen elektronischen Übermittlung am
Bildschirm des Endverbrauchers. Um auch hier künftige
Nutzungsformen zu verfassen, wird es sinnvoll sein, den
Werkgenuss (die Wahrnehmung der Werke) genauso in die
Nutzungsrechte einzubeziehen wie die Wahrnehmbarmachung der
Werke.

2  As announced in the Intellectual Property Strategy'A single
market for Intellectual Property Rights: COM

287  final,24/05/2011.

3  "Based on market studies andimpact assessment and legal
drafting work"as announced in the Communication

789.

24  Injunctive relief is a temporary or permanent remedy
allowing the right holder to stop or prevent an infringement of
his/her right.

56  Communication "Unleashing the Potential of Cloud Computing
in Europe", COM(2012)529final.

57  These issues were addressed in the recommendations of
MrAntónio Vitorinoresulting from the mediation on private
copying and reprography levies. You can consultthese
recommendations on the following
website:http://ec.europa.eu/internalmarket/copyright/docs/levy
reform/130131 levies-vitorino-recommendations en.pdf.

