


Public Consultation

on the review of the EU copyright rules

Contents

I.  Introduction  2

A.  Context of the consultation  2

B.  How to submit replies to this questionnaire  3

C.  Confidentiality  3

II.  Rights and the functioning of the Single Market  7

A.  Why is it not possible to access many online content
services from anywhere in Europe?  7

B.  Is there a need for more clarity as regards the scope of
what needs to be authorised (or not) in digital transmissions?
10

1.  The act of “making available”  10

2.  Two rights involved in a single act of exploitation  11

3.  Linking and browsing  12

4.  Download to own digital content  13

C.  Registration of works and other subject matter – is it a
good idea?  14

D.  How to improve the use and interoperability of identifiers
15

E.  Term of protection – is it appropriate?  15

III.  Limitations and exceptions in the Single Market  16

A.  Access to content in libraries and archives  19

1.  Preservation and archiving  19

2.  Off-premises access to library collections  20

3.  E – lending  21

4.  Mass digitisation  22

B.  Teaching  24

C.  Research  25

D.  Disabilities  26

E.  Text and data mining  27

F.  User-generated content  29

IV.  Private copying and reprography  31

V.  Fair remuneration of authors and performers  34

VI.  Respect for rights  35

VII.  A single EU Copyright Title  36

VIII.  Other issues  37

Introduction

Context of the consultation

Over the last two decades, digital technology and the Internet
have reshaped the ways in which content is created,
distributed, and accessed. New opportunities have materialised
for those that create and produce content (e.g. a film, a
novel, a song),for new and existingdistribution platforms,for
institutions such as libraries, for activities such as research
and for citizens who now expect to be able to access content –
for information, education or entertainment purposes –
regardless of geographical borders.

This new environment also presents challenges.One of themis for
the market to continue to adapt to new forms of distribution
and use.Another oneis for the legislator to ensure that the
system of rights, limitations to rights and enforcement remains
appropriate and is adapted to the new environment. This
consultation focuses on the second of these challenges:
ensuring that the EU copyright regulatory frameworkstays fit
for purpose in the digital environmentto support creation and
innovation, tap the full potential of the Single
Market,fostergrowth andinvestment in our economy
andpromotecultural diversity.

In its"Communication on Content in the Digital Single Market"1

COM (2012)789 final, 18/12/2012.

the Commission set out two parallel tracks of action:ontheone
hand, to complete its on-going effort to review and to
modernise the EU copyright legislative framework2

As announced in the Intellectual Property Strategy ' A single
market for Intellectual Property Rights: COM (2011)287 final,
24/05/2011.

3

"Based on market studies and impact assessment and legal
drafting work"as announced in the Communication (2012)789.

with a view to a decision in 2014 on whether to table
legislative reform proposals, andon the other, to facilitate
practical industry-led solutions through the stakeholder
dialogue"Licences for Europe"on issues on which rapid progress
was deemed necessary and possible.

The"Licences for Europe"process has been finalised now4

See the document “Licences for Europe – tem pledges to bring
more content
online”:http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/copyright/docs/licences-for-europe/131113_ten-pledges_en.pdf.

. The Commission welcomes the practical solutions stakeholders
have put forward in thiscontext and will monitor their
progress. Pledges have been made by stakeholders in all four
Working Groups (cross border portability of services,
user-generated content,audiovisual andfilm heritage and text
and data mining). Taken together, the Commission expects these
pledgesto bea further step in making the user environment
easier in many different situations. The Commission also takes
note of the fact that two groups –user-generated content
andtext and data mining–did not reach consensus among
participating stakeholders on either the problems to be
addressed or on the results. Thediscussions andresults
of"Licences for Europe"will be also taken into account in the
context of the review of the legislative framework.

As part of thereview process, the Commission is now launching a
public consultation onissuesidentified in the Communication on
Content in the Digital Single Market, i.e.:"territoriality in
the Internal Market, harmonisation, limitations and exceptions
to copyright in the digital age; fragmentation of the EU
copyright market; and how to improve the effectiveness and
efficiency of enforcement while underpinning its legitimacy in
the wider context of copyright reform". As highlighted in the
October 2013 European CouncilConclusions5

EUCO 169/13, 24/25 October 2013.

"Providingdigital services and content across the single market
requires the establishment of a copyright regime for the
digital age. The Commission will therefore complete its
on-going review of the EU copyright framework in spring 2014.
It is important to modernise Europe's copyright regime and
facilitate licensing, while ensuring a high level protection of
intellectual property rights and taking into account cultural
diversity".

This consultation builds on previous consultations and public
hearings, in particular those on the"Green Paper on copyright
in the knowledge economy"6

COM(2008)
466/3,http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/copyright/copyright-infso/index_en.htm#maincontentSec2.

, the"Green Paper on the online distribution of audiovisual
works"7

COM(2011) 427
final,http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/consultations/2011/audiovisual_en.htm.

and"Content Online"8

http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/consultations/2009/content_online_en.htm.

. These consultations provided valuable feedback from
stakeholders on a number of questions,on issues as diverse as
the territoriality of copyright and possible ways to overcome
territoriality, exceptions related to the online dissemination
of knowledge, and rightholders’ remuneration, particularly in
the audiovisual sector. Views were expressed by stakeholders
representing all stages in the value chain, including right
holders, distributors, consumers, and academics. The questions
elicited widely diverging views on the best way to proceed. The
"Green Paper on Copyright in the Knowledge Economy" was followed
up by a Communication. The replies to the "Green Paper on the
online distribution of audiovisual works" have fed into
subsequent discussions on the Collective Rights Management
Directive and into the current review process.

How to submit replies to this questionnaire

You are kindly asked to send your repliesby5 March2014as a word
or pdf documenttothefollowinge-mail address of DG Internal
Market and Services:markt-copyright-consultation@ec.europa.eu.
Please note that replies sentafterthat date will not be taken
into account.

This consultation is addressed to different categories of
stakeholders. To the extent possible, the questions indicate
the category/ies of respondents most likely to be concerned by
them (annotation in brackets, before the actual question).
Respondents should nevertheless feel free to reply to any/all
of the questions. Also, please note that, apart from the
question concerning the identification of the respondent, none
of the questions is obligatory. Replies containing answers only
to part of the questions will be also accepted.

You are requested toprovideyour answers directlywithin
thisconsultation document. For the“Yes/No/No
opinion”questionsplease put the selected answer
inboldandunderlineit so it is easy for us to see your
selection.

In your answers to the questions, you are invited to refer to
the situation in EUMember States.You are also invited in
particular to indicate, where relevant, what would be the
impact of options you put forward in terms of costs,
opportunities and revenues.

The public consultation is available in English.
Responsesmay,however,be sent in any of the 24officiallanguages
of the EU.

Confidentiality

The contributions received in this round of consultation as well
as asummary reportpresenting theresponsesin a statistical and
aggregated formwill be published on the website of DG MARKT.

Please note that all contributions received will be published
together with the identity of the contributor, unless the
contributor objects to the publication of their personal data
on the grounds that such publication would harm his or her
legitimate interests. In this case, the contribution will be
published in anonymous form upon the contributor's explicit
request. Otherwise the contribution will not be published nor
will its content be reflected in the summary report.

Pleaseread ourPrivacy statement.

Please identify yourself:

Name:

Marie Sellier

Ecrivain

In the interests of transparency, organisations (including, for
example, NGOs, trade associations and commercial enterprises)
are invited to provide the public with relevant information
about themselves by registering in the Interest Representative
Register and subscribing to its Code of Conduct.

If you are a Registered organisation, please indicate your
Register ID number below. Your contribution will then be
considered as representing the views of your organisation.

…………………………………………………………………………………………………..

…………………………………………………………………………………………………..

If your organisation is not registered, you have the opportunity
toregister now.Responses from organisations not registered will
be published separately.

If you would like to submit your reply on an anonymous basis
please indicate it belowby underlining the following answer:

Yes, I would like to submit my reply on an anonymous basis

Type of respondent(Pleaseunderlinethe appropriate):

End user/consumer(e.g.internet user,reader, subscriber to
musicor audiovisualservice, researcher,student)ORRepresentative
of end users/consumers

for the purposes of this questionnaire normally referred to
in questions as"end users/consumers"

Institutional user(e.g. school,university, research centre,
library, archive)ORRepresentative of institutional users

for the purposes of this questionnaire normally referred to
in questions as"institutional users"

X  Author/Performer OR

Publisher/Producer/Broadcaster OR Representative of
publishers/producers/broadcasters

the two above categoriesare,for the purposes of this
questionnaire, normally referred to in questions as"right
holders"

Intermediary/Distributor/Other service provider(e.g. online
music or audiovisual service, games platform,social media,
search engine, ICT industry)OR Representative of
intermediaries/distributors/other service providers

for the purposes of this questionnaire normally referred to
in questionsas"service providers"

Collective Management Organisation

Public authority

Member State

Other(Please explain):

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Rights and the functioning of the Single Market

Why is it not possible to accessmany online content servicesfrom
anywhere in Europe?[The territorial scope of the rights involved
in digital transmissions and the segmentation of the market
through licensing agreements]

Holders of copyright and related rights – e.g. writers, singers,
musicians - do not enjoy a single protection in the EU. Instead,
they are protected on the basis of a bundle of national rights
in each Member State. Those rights have been largely harmonised
by the existing EU Directives. However, differences remain and
the geographical scope of the rights is limited to the
territory of the Member State granting them.Copyright is thus
territorial in the sense that rights are acquired and enforced
on a country-by-country basis under national law9

This principle has been confirmed by the Court of justice on
several occasions.

.

The dissemination of copyright-protected content on the Internet
– e.g. by a music streaming service, or by an online e-book
seller – therefore requires, in principle, an authorisation for
each national territory in which the content is communicated to
the public. Rightholders are, of course, in a position to grant
a multi-territorial or pan-European licence, such that content
services can be provided in several Member States and across
borders.A number of stepshave beentaken at EU level to
facilitate multi-territoriallicences: the proposal for a
Directive on Collective Rights Management10

Proposalfor a Directiveof the European Parliament and of the
Councilof 11 July 2012 on collective management of copyright
and related rights and multi-territorial licensing of rights in
musical works for online uses in the internal market, COM(2012)
372 final.

should significantly facilitate the delivery of
multi-territorial licences in musical worksfor online
services11

CollectiveManagementOrganisations play a significant role inthe
management of online rights for musical works in contrastto
thesituation where online rights are licenseddirectly by right
holders such asfilm or record producers or by newspaper or book
publishers.

;the structured stakeholder dialogue “Licences for Europe”12

You can find more information on the following website:
http://ec.europa.eu/licences-for-europe-dialogue/.

and market-led developments such as the on-going work in the
Linked Content Coalition13

You can find more information on the following
website:http://www.linkedcontentcoalition.org/.

.

"Licences for Europe" addressed in particular the specific issue
of cross-border portability, i.e. the ability of consumers
having subscribed to online services in their Member State to
keep accessing them when travelling temporarily to other Member
States. As a result, representatives of the audio-visual sector
issued a joint statement affirming their commitment to continue
working towards the further development of cross-border
portability14

See the document “Licences for Europe – tem pledges to bring
more content
online”:http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/copyright/docs/licences-for-europe/131113_ten-pledges_en.pdf.

.

Despite progress, there are continued problems with the
cross-border provision of, and access to, services. These
problems are most obvious to consumers wanting to access
services that are made available in Member States other than
the one in which they live. Not all online services are
available in all Member States and consumers face problems when
trying to access such services across borders. In some
instances, even if the “same” service is available in all
Member States, consumers cannot access the service across
borders (they can only access their “national” service, and if
they try to access the "same" service in another Member State
they are redirected to the one designated for their country of
residence).

This situation may in part stem from the territoriality of
rights and difficulties associated with the clearing of rights
in different territories. Contractual clauses in licensing
agreements between right holders and distributors and/or
between distributors and end users may also be at the origin of
some of the problems (denial of access, redirection).

The main issue at stake here is, therefore, whether further
measures (legislative or non-legislative, including market-led
solutions) need to be taken at EU level in the medium term15

For possible long term measures such as the establishment of
aEuropean Copyright Code(establishinga single title) see
section VII of this consultation document.

to increase the cross-border availability of content services in
the Single Market, while ensuring an adequate level of
protection for right holders.

[In particular if you are an end user/consumer:]Have you faced
problems whentryingto access online services in an EU Member
State other than the one in which you live?

YES - Please provide examples indicating the Member State,
the sector and the type of content concerned (e.g. premium
content such as certain films and TV series, audio-visual
content in general, music, e-books, magazines, journals and
newspapers, games, applications and other software)

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

X NO

NO OPINION

[In particular if you area service provider:]Have you faced
problems when seeking to provide online services across
bordersin the EU?

YES - Please explain whether such problems, in your
experience, are related to copyright or to other issues (e.g.
business decisions relating to the cost of providing services
across borders, compliance with other laws such as consumer
protection)? Please provide examples indicating the Member
State, the sector and the type of content concerned (e.g.
premium content such as certain films and TV series,
audio-visual content in general, music, e-books, magazines,
journals and newspapers, games, applications and other
software).

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

X NO

Je n’ai pasde difficultés pour l’exploitation demesœuvres sur
tous les territoires

NO OPINION

[In particular if you are a right holder or a collective
management organisation:]How often are you asked to grant
multi-territorial licences? Please indicate, if possible, the
number of requests per year and provide examples indicating the
Member State, the sector and the type of content concerned.

[Openquestion]

Dans mescontratsd’édition, je cède mes droitspour le territoire
Monde.

If you have identified problems in the answers to any of the
questions above – what would be the best way to tackle them?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

[In particular if you area right holder or acollective
management organisation:]Are there reasons why, even in cases
where you hold all the necessary rights for all the territories
in question, you would still find it necessary or justified to
impose territorial restrictions on a service provider (in
order, for instance, to ensure that access to certain content
is not possible in certain European countries)?

X YES– Please explain by giving examples

Il est parfois nécessaired’organiser la diffusion de l’œuvre en
tenant compte de la nature des droits concédés, de la
récupération des recettes qui serait faite par ceux ayant
apporté des investissements et des rémunérations que cela
procure aux ayants droit. Dans le domaine du livre, la cession
des droits exclusifs, par exemple pour une traduction dans une
langue et/ou un territoire donné, est une source de
rémunération partagée entre les auteurs et les éditeurs.

NO

NO OPINION

[In particular if you are e.g. a broadcaster or a service
provider:]Are there reasons why, even in cases where you have
acquired all the necessary rights for all the territories in
question, you would still find it necessary or justified to
impose territorial restrictions on the service recipient (in
order for instance, to redirect the consumer to a different
website than the one he is trying to access)?

 YES – Please explain by giving examples

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO

 NO OPINION

Do you think that further measures (legislative or
non-legislative, including market-led solutions) are needed at
EU level to increase the cross-border availability of content
services in the Single Market, while ensuring an adequate level
ofprotection for right holders?

YES – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

X NO– Please explain

Le cadre législatif issu de la directive de 2001répondaux
besoins des titulaires de droits et des utilisateurs.Toute
modificationprécipitée aurait pour effet de bouleverser les
équilibres mis en place depuis plus de dix ans.

NO OPINION

Is there a need for more clarity as regards the scope of what
needs to be authorised (or not) in digital transmissions?[The
definition of the rights involved in digital transmissions]

The EU framework for the protection of copyright and related
rights in the digital environment is largely established by
Directive 2001/29/EC16

Directive 2001/29/EC of the European Parliament and of the
Council of 22 May 2001 on the harmonisation of certain aspects
of copyright and related rights in the information society.

on the harmonisation of certain aspects of copyright and related
rights in the information society. OtherEUdirectives in this
field that are relevant in the online environment are those
relating to the protection of software17

Directive 2009/24/EC of the European Parliament and of the
Council of 23 April 2009 on the legal protection of computer
programs.

and databases18

Directive 96/9/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council
of 11 March 1996 on the legal protection of databases.

.

Directive 2001/29/ECharmonisestherights of authors and
neighbouring rightholders19

Film and record producers, performers and broadcasters are
holders of so-called “neighbouring rights” in, respectively,
their films, records, performances and broadcast. Authors’
content protected by copyright is referred to as a “work” or
“works”, while content protected by neighbouring rights is
referred to as “other subject matter”.

which are essential for thetransmission of digital copiesof
works(e.g. an e-book)and other protected subject matter(e.g. a
record in a MP3 format)over the internet or similar digital
networks.

The mostrelevantrightsfor digital transmissionsarethe
reproduction right, i.e. the right to authorise or prohibit the
making of copies20

The right to “authorise or prohibit direct or indirect,
temporary or permanent reproduction by any means and in any
form, in whole or in part” (see Art. 2 of Directive 2001/29/EC)
although temporary acts of reproduction of a transient or
incidental nature are, under certain conditions, excluded (see
art. 5(1) of Directive 2001/29/EC).

,(notablyrelevant at the start of the transmission –e.g. the
uploading ofadigital copy of a work to a serverin view ofmaking
it available–and at the users’ end– e.g. when a user downloads
a digital copy of a work)and the communication to the
public/making available right, i.e. the rights to authorise or
prohibit the dissemination of the works in digital networks21

The right to authorise or prohibit any communication to the
public by wire or wireless means and to authorise or prohibit
the making available to the public “on demand” (seeArt. 3 of
Directive 2001/29/EC).

.These rightsare intrinsically linked in digital
transmissionsandboth need to be cleared.

The act of “making available”

Directive 2001/29/EC specifiesneitherwhatis covered bythe making
available right(e.g. the upload,the accessibility by the
public,theactualreception by the public)norwherethe act of
“making available” takes place. This does not raise questions
if the act is limited to a singleterritory. Questions arise
however when the transmission covers several territories and
rights need to be cleared (does the act of "making available"
happen in the country of the upload only? in each of the
countries where the content is potentially accessible? in each
of the countries where thecontent is effectively accessed?).The
most recent case law of the Court of Justice of the European
Union (CJEU)suggests that a relevant criterion is
the“targeting” of a certainMember State'spublic22

See in particularCase C-173/11(Football Dataco vs Sportradar)
andCase C-5/11 (Donner) for copyright and related rights, and
Case C-324/09 (L’Oréal vs eBay) for trademarks. With regard to
jurisdiction seealso joined Cases C-585/08 and C-144/09 (Pammer
and Hotel Alpenhof)andpending CaseC-441/13 (Pez Hejduk);
seehowever,adopting a different approach, CaseC-170/12
(Pinckney vs KDG Mediatech).

. According to this approachthecopyright-relevant act(which has
to be licensed) occurs at leastin those countries which are
“targeted” by the online service provider.A service provider
“targets” a group of customers residing in a specific country
when it directs its activity to that group, e.g. via
advertisement, promotions, a language or a currency
specifically targeted at that group.

Isthe scope of the“making available”right in cross-border
situations – i.e. when content is disseminated across borders
–sufficiently clear?

X YES

Pas dedifficultés à ce jour.

NO–Pleaseexplain how this could be clarified and what
typeofclarification would be required(e.g.as in "targeting"
approach explained above,as in "country of origin"approach23

The objective of implementing a “country of origin”approachis to
localise the copyright relevant act that must be licenced in a
single Member State (the "country of origin", which could be
for example the Member State in whichthe content is uploaded or
wherethe service provider is established), regardless of in how
many Member States the work canbe accessed or received. Such an
approachhas already been introduced at EU level with regard to
broadcasting by satellite(seeDirective 93/83/EEC on the
coordination of certain rules concerning copyright and rights
related to copyright applicable to satellite broadcasting and
cable retransmission).

)

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO OPINION

[In particular if you are a right holder:]Could a clarification
of the territorial scope of the “making available” right have
an effect on the recognition of your rights (e.g. whether you
are considered to be an author or not, whether you are
considered to have transferred your rights or not),onyour
remuneration, oron the enforcement of rights (including the
availability of injunctive relief24

Injunctive relief is a temporary or permanent remedy allowing
the right holder to stop or prevent an infringement of his/her
right.

)?

YES – Please explain howsuchpotential effectscould
beaddressed

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

X NO

NO OPINION

Two rights involved in a single act of exploitation

Each act of transmission in digital networks entails(in the
current state of technology and law) several reproductions.This
means that there are two rights that apply to digital
transmissions: the reproduction right and the making available
right. Thismay complicate the licensing of works for online
usenotably whenthetwo rights are held by different
persons/entities.

[In particular if youa service provider or a right holder:]Does
the application of two rights to a single act of economic
exploitation in the online environment (e.g. a download) create
problems for you?

YES – Please explainwhat type of measureswould be needed in
order to address such problems (e.g. facilitation of joint
licences when the rights are in different hands,legislation to
achieve the "bundling of rights")

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

X NO

NO OPINION

Linking and browsing

Hyperlinks are references to data that lead a user from one
location in the Internet to another. They are indispensable for
the functioning of the Internet as a network. Several cases are
pending before the CJEU25

Cases C-466/12 (Svensson), C-348/13 (Bestwater International)
and C-279/13 (C More entertainment).

in which the question has been raised whether the provision of
a clickable link constitutes an act of communication to the
public/making available to the public subject to the
authorisation of the rightholder.

A user browsing the internet (e.g. viewing a web-page) regularly
creates temporary copies of works and other subject-matter
protected under copyright on the screen and in the 'cache'
memory of his computer. A question has been referred to the
CJEU26

Case C-360/13 (Public Relations Consultants Association Ltd).See
alsohttp://www.supremecourt.gov.uk/decided-cases/docs/UKSC_2011_0202_PressSummary.pdf.

as to whether such copies are always covered by the mandatory
exception for temporary acts of reproduction provided for in
Article 5(1) of Directive 2001/29/EC.

Should the provision of a hyperlink leading to a work or other
subject matter protected under copyright,either in generalor
under specific circumstances,besubject to the authorisation of
the rightholder?

X YES– Please explain whether you consider this to be the case
in general, or under specificcircumstances, and why

Unerémunération doit être versée aux ayants droit des contenus
servant à l'opérateur à générer des recettes dans le cadre de
son activité.

 NO – Please explainwhether you consider this to be the case
in general,or under specific circumstances, and why(e.g.
because it does not amount to an act of communication to the
public – or to a new public, or because it should be covered by
a copyright exception)

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO OPINION

Should the viewing of a web-page where this impliesthetemporary
reproduction of a work or other subject matter protected under
copyrighton the screen and in thecache memory of the user’s
computer,either in general or under specific circumstances, be
subject to the authorisation of the rightholder?

 YES – Please explainwhether you consider this to be the case
in general, or under specific circumstances, and why

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

X NO– Please explainwhether you consider this to be the case in
general,or under specific circumstances, andwhy(e.g. because it
isor should be covered by a copyright exception)

Ces actes, qui n’ont pas d’incidence économique suffisante,
n’ont pas à faire l’objet d’une autorisation préalable.

NO OPINION

Download to own digital content

Digital content is increasinglybeing boughtvia
digitaltransmission(e.g. download to own). Questions arise as
to the possibility forusersto dispose of the filesthey buy in
this manner(e.g. by selling themor by giving them as a gift).
The principle of EU exhaustion of the distribution right
applies in the case of the distribution ofphysical copies (e.g.
when a tangible article such as a CD or a book, etc. is sold,
the right holder cannot prevent the further distribution of
that tangible article)27

See also recital 28 of Directive 2001/29/EC.

. The issue that arises here is whether this principle can also
be applied in the case of an act of transmission equivalent in
its effect to distribution (i.e. where the buyer acquires the
property of the copy)28

In Case C-128/11 (Oracle vs. UsedSoft) the CJEU ruled that an
author cannot oppose the resale of a second-hand licence that
allows downloading his computer program from his website and
using it for an unlimited period of time. The exclusive right
of distribution of a copy of a computer program covered by such
a licence is exhausted on its first sale.While it is thus
admitted that the distribution right may be subject to
exhaustion in case of computer programs offered for download
with the right holder’s consent, the Court was careful to
emphasise that it reached this decision based on the Computer
Programs Directive. It was stressed that this exhaustion rule
constituted alex specialisin relation to the Information
Society Directive (UsedSoft, par. 51, 56).

. This raises difficult questions, notably relating to the
practical application of such an approach (how to
avoidre-sellers keepingand usinga copy ofawork afterthey have
“re-sold” it – this is often referred to as the “forward and
delete” question) as well as to theeconomic implications of the
creation of a second-hand market of copies of perfect quality
that never deteriorate (in contrast to the second-hand market
for physical goods).

[In particular if you are an end user/consumer:]Have you faced
restrictions when trying to resell digital files that you have
purchased (e.g. mp3 file, e-book)?

 YES – Please explain by giving examples

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO

 NO OPINION

[In particular if you area right holder or a service provider:]
What would bethe consequencesof providing a legal framework
enabling the resale of previously purchased digital content?
Please specify per market (type of content) concerned.

[Open question]

La légalisation de la revente d’un fichier numérique d’un livre
protégé acheté en ligne, introduirait un bouleversement
économique radical dont on ne mesure pas les conséquences. En
effet, le marché primaire des œuvres se trouverait directement
concurrencé par le développement d’un marché de l’occasion, où,
par hypothèse, les copies des œuvres auraient un prix moindre,
alors qu’elles ne subissent aucune dégradation, à la différence
des œuvres fixées sur un support matérialisé.

Registration of works and other subject matter – is it a good
idea?

Registration is not often discussed in copyright in the EU as
the existing international treaties in the area prohibit
formalities as a condition for theprotection and
exerciseofrights. However,this prohibition is not absolute29

For example, it does not affect “domestic” works – i.e.works
originating inthe country imposing the formalitiesas opposed to
works originating inanothercountry.

.Moreover a system of registration does not need to be made
compulsory or constitute a precondition for the protection and
exercise of rights.With a longer term of protection and with
the increased opportunities that digital technology
providesfortheuse of content(includingolder works and works
that otherwise wouldnot havebeen disseminated),the advantages
and disadvantages of a system of registrationare increasingly
being considered30

On the basis of Article 3.6 of the Directive 2012/28/EU of the
European Parliament and of the Council of 25 October 2012 on
certain permitted uses of orphan works, a publicly accessible
online database is currently being set up by the Office
forHarmonisation of theInternalMarket (OHIM)for the
registration of orphan works.

.

Would the creation of a registration system at EU level help in
the identification and licensing of works and other subject
matter?

YES

X NO

NO OPINION

What would bethe possible advantagesof such a system?

[Open question]

L’avantage d’un système d’enregistrement serait de permettre à
tout utilisateur de retrouver l’auteur ou les ayants droit
d’une œuvre et de lutter contre les œuvres dites orphelines.

Un tel système faciliterait également le respect du droit
d’auteur en offrant un guichet unique aux utilisateurs.

What would bethe possible disadvantagesof such a system?

[Open question]

Les difficultés d’un tel système résident essentiellement dans
son coût et ses difficultés techniques.

Pour les livres eux-mêmes, il existe déjà un standard
international d’enregistrement et d’identification l’ISBN ainsi
que le standard EAN qui figure sur toutes les marchandises.

What incentives forregistrationbyrightholderscould be envisaged?

[Open question]

Siun tel enregistrement existait, il ne devrait pas être
obligatoire et ne devrait se faire que sur la base du
volontariat.

How to improve theuse andinteroperability ofidentifiers

There are many private databases of works and other subject
matter held by producers, collective management organisations,
and institutions such as libraries, which are based to
a greater or lesser extent on the use of (more or less)
interoperable, internationally agreed ‘identifiers’.
Identifiers can be compared to a reference number embedded in a
work, are specific to the sector in which they have been
developed31

E.g. the International Standard Recording Code (ISRC) is used to
identify recordings, the International Standard Book Number
(ISBN) is used to identify books.

, and identify, variously, the work itself, the owner or the
contributor to a work or other subject matter. There are
notable examples of where industry is undertaking actions to
improve the interoperability of such identifiers and databases.
The Global Repertoire Database32

You will find more information about this initiative on the
following website:http://www.globalrepertoiredatabase.com/.

should, once operational, provide a single source of information
on the ownership and control of musical works worldwide. The
Linked Content Coalition33

You will find more information about this initiative(funded in
part by the European Commission)on the following website:
www.linkedcontentcoalition.org.

was established to develop building blocks for the expression
and management of rights and licensing across all content and
media types. It includes the development of a Rights Reference
Model (RRM) – a comprehensive data model for all types of
rights in all types of content. The UK Copyright Hub34

You will find more information about this initiative on the
following website:http://www.copyrighthub.co.uk/.

is seeking to take such identification systems a step further,
and to create a linked platform, enabling automated licensing
across different sectors.

What should be the role of the EU in promoting the adoption
of identifiers in the content sector, and in promoting the
development and interoperability of rights ownership and
permissions databases?

[Open question]

Pour les livres existe déjà le standard international ISBN qui
permet d’identifier chaque édition de chaque ouvrage imprimé ou
numérique.

En revanche, il semblerait utile d’imposer législativement le
respect des champs IPTC renseignés par les auteurs tels que
nom, prénom, pseudonyme, légende de l’œuvre, coordonnées de
l’auteur, ayant-droit/agence/agent/société d’auteur … qui
permettent d’identifier un auteur.

Term of protection – is it appropriate?

Works and other subject matter are protected under copyright for
a limited period of time. After the term of protection has
expired, a work falls into the public domain and can be freely
used by anyone (in accordance with the applicable national
rules on moral rights). The Berne Convention35

Berne Convention for the Protection of Literary and Artistic
Works,http://www.wipo.int/treaties/en/ip/berne/.

requires a minimum term of protection of 50 years after the
death of the author. The EU rules extend this term of
protection to 70 years after the death of the author (as do
many other countries, e.g. the US).

With regard to performers in the music sector and phonogram
producers, the term provided for in the EU rules also extend 20
years beyond what is mandated in international agreements,
providing for a term of protection of 70 years after the first
publication. Performers and producers in the audio-visual
sector, however, do not benefit from such an extended term of
protection.

20.  Are the current terms of copyright protection still
appropriate in the digital environment?

X YES– Please explain

Ladurée de 70 ans après la date de décès de l’auteur ne pose pas
de problèmes particuliers au regard des exploitations
numériques.Celapermetnotammentaux ayants droit de faire vivre
l’œuvre de l’auteur après son décès. 

NO – Please explain if they should be longer or shorter

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO OPINION

Limitations and exceptions in the Single Market

Limitations and exceptions to copyright and related rights
enable the use of works and other protected subject-matter,
without obtaining authorisation from the rightholders, for
certain purposes and to a certain extent (for instance the use
for illustration purposes of an extract from a novel by a
teacher in a literature class). At EU level theyare established
in a number of copyright directives, most notably
Directive2001/29/EC36

Plus Directive 96/9/ECon the legal protection of
databases;Directive 2009/24/ECon the legal protection of
computer programs,and Directive 92/100/ECon rental right and
lending right.

.

Exceptions and limitations in the national and EU copyright laws
have to respect international law37

Article 9(2) of the Berne Convention for the Protection of
Literary and Artistic Works (1971); Article 13 of the TRIPS
Agreement (Trade Related Intellectual Property Rights) 1994;
Article 16(2) of the WIPO Performers and Phonograms Treaty
(1996); Article 9(2) of the WIPO Copyright Treaty (1996).

. In accordance with international obligations, the EU acquis
requires that limitations and exceptions can only be applied in
certain special cases which do not conflict with a normal
exploitation of the work or other subject matter and do not
unreasonably prejudice the legitimate interest of the
rightholders.

Whereas thecatalogueof limitations and exceptions included
inEUlawis exhaustive(no other exceptions can be applied to the
rights harmonised at EU level)38

Other than the grandfathering of the exceptions of minor
importance for analogue uses existing in Member States at the
time of adoption ofDirective 2001/29/EC(see, Art. 5(3)(o)).

, these limitations and exceptions areoftenoptional39

With the exception ofcertain limitations: (i)in the Computer
Programs Directive,(ii) in the Database Directive,(iii) Article
5(1) in theDirective 2001/29/ECand(iv) the OrphanWorksDirective.

,in the sense thatMember Statesare free to reflect in national
legislation as many or as few of them as they wish.Moreover,the
formulation of certain of the limitations andexceptionsis
general enough to give significantflexibility totheMember
States as to how,and to what extent,toimplement them (if they
decide to do so). Finally,it is worth noting that not all of
the limitationsand exceptionsincluded in the EUlegal framework
for copyrightare of equivalent significance in policy terms and
in terms of their potential effect on the functioning of the
Single Market.

Inaddition, inthe same manner that the definition of the rights
is territorial (i.e. has an effect only within the territory of
the Member State), the definition of the limitations and
exceptions to the rights is territorial too (so an act that is
covered by an exception in a Member State "A" may still require
the authorisation of the rightholder once we move to the Member
State "B")40

Only theexception established in therecent Orphan Works
Directive(a mandatory exceptionto copyright and related rights
in the case where the rightholders are not known or cannot be
located) has been givena cross-border effect, which means that,
for instance, once a literary work – for instance a novel – is
considered an orphan work in a Member State, that same
novelshall be considered an orphan work in all Member Statesand
can beused and accessed in all Member States.

.

The cross-bordereffectoflimitations andexceptionsalsoraises the
question of fair compensation of rightholders.In some
instances,Member States are obliged to compensate rightholders
for theharm inflicted on them bya limitation orexceptionto
their rights. In other instancesMember Statesare not obliged,
butmay decide,to provide for such compensation.If a limitation
or exception triggering a mechanism of fair compensation were
to be given cross-border effect (e.g. the books are used for
illustration in an online course given by an university in
a Member State "A" and the students are in a Member State "B")
then there would also be a need to clarifywhich national law
shoulddeterminethe level of that compensation and who should
pay it.

Finally, the question of flexibility and adaptability is being
raised: what is the best mechanism to ensure that the EU and
Member States’ regulatory frameworks adapt when necessary
(either to clarify that certain uses are covered by an
exception or to confirm that for certain uses the authorisation
of rightholders is required)? The main question here is whether
a greater degree of flexibility can be introduced in the EU and
Member States regulatory framework while ensuring the required
legal certainty, including for the functioning of the Single
Market, and respecting the EU's international obligations.

Are there problems arising from the fact that most limitations
and exceptions provided in the EUcopyright directivesare
optionalfor the Member States?

YES – Please explain by referring to specific cases

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

X NO– Please explain

NO OPINION

Should some/all of the exceptions be made mandatory and, if so,
is there aneed for a higher level of harmonisation of such
exceptions?

YES–Please explain byreferringto specific cases

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

X NO–Please explain

NO OPINION

Should any newlimitations andexceptions be added toor removed
fromthe existing catalogue?Please explain by referring to
specific cases.

[Open question]

Les exceptions listées à l’article 5 de la directive de 2001
couvrent un champ étendu et sont formulées de manière
suffisamment large pour permettre aux États membres, et par la
suite à la jurisprudence, d’insuffler dans leur système interne
toute la souplesse nécessaire. Dans ces conditions, il ne paraît
pas souhaitable d’ajouter de nouvelles exceptions, qui
pourraient bouleverser les écosystèmes en place et être
utilisées comme cheval de Troie par des sociétés commerciales
mal intentionnées. 

Independently from the questions above, is there a need to
provide for a greater degree of flexibility in the EU
regulatory framework for limitations and exceptions?

YES – Please explain why

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

X NO– Please explain why

La souplesse est nécessaire dans tout système de droit d’auteur.
Mais le recours aux exceptions – qui sont, pour les auteurs, des
expropriations – ne doit être envisagée que si d’autres
instruments, tels que le contrat ou la gestion collective, ne
permettent pas de l’assurer. Il faut en outre rappeler que là
où des exceptions sont prévues dans la législation nationale,
les juges peuvent interpréter la loi, conformément au test en
trois étapes, dans le sens de la flexibilité. Il faut laisser
les différents acteurs (auteurs, utilisateurs, pouvoir
réglementaire, juge…) élaborer les règles et les usages
permettant d’atteindre la flexibilité voulue. L’intervention
législative ne doit être envisagée qu’en dernier ressort. Elle
doit en tout état de cause exclure toute solution de type « fair
use », qui créerait une très forte insécurité juridique
préjudiciable tant aux titulaires de droits qu’aux
utilisateurs.

NO OPINION

If yes, what would be the best approach to provide for
flexibility? (e.g. interpretation by national courts and the
ECJ, periodic revisions of the directives, interpretations by
the Commission, built-in flexibility, e.g. in the form of a
fair-use or fair dealing provision / open norm, etc.)? Please
explain indicating what would be the relative advantages and
disadvantages of such an approach as well as its possible
effects on the functioning of the Internal Market.

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Does the territoriality of limitations and exceptions, in your
experience,constitute a problem?

YES–Please explain why andspecify which exceptions you are
referring to

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

X NO– Please explain why and specify whichexceptions you are
referring to

NO OPINION

In the event that limitations and exceptions established at
national level were to have cross-border effect, how should the
question of “fair compensation” be addressed, when such
compensation is part of the exception? (e.g. who pays whom,
where?)

[Open question]

La question ne se pose pas en pratique.

Access to content in libraries and archives
===========================================

Directive2001/29/EC enablesMember Statesto reflect in their
national law a rangeoflimitations andexceptions for the benefit
of publicly accessible libraries, educational establishments and
museums, as well as archives. If implemented, these
exceptionsallow acts of preservation and archiving41

Article 5(2)c of Directive 2001/29.

andenable on-site consultation oftheworks and other subject
matter in the collections of such institutions42

Article 5(3)nof Directive 2001/29.

. The public lending(under an exception or limitation)by these
establishments of physical copies of works and other subject
matter is governed by the Rental and Lending Directive43

Article 5 of Directive 2006/115/EC.

.

Questionsarise as to whetherthe current framework continues to
achieve the objectives envisaged or whether it needs to be
clarified or updated to cover use in digital networks. At the
same time, questions arise as to the effect of such a possible
expansion on the normal exploitation of works and other subject
matter and as to the prejudice this may cause torightholders.
The role of licensing and possible framework agreements between
different stakeholders also needsto be considered here.

Preservationand archiving

The preservation of the copies of worksor othersubject-matter
held in the collections of cultural establishments (e.g. books,
records, or films)– the restoration or replacement of works, the
copying of fragile works -mayinvolvethe creation ofanother
copy/iesof these worksor othersubject matter. Most Member
States provide for an exception in their national laws allowing
for the making of such preservation copies.The scope of the
exceptiondiffersfrom Member State to Member State(as regardsthe
type of beneficiary establishments, the types of
works/subject-mattercovered by the exception, the mode of
copyingand the number of reproductions that a beneficiary
establishment may make).Also, the current legal status of new
types of preservation activities (e.g. harvesting and archiving
publicly available web content) is often uncertain.

(a)[In particular if you arean institutional user:]Have you
experienced specific problems when trying to use an exception
to preserve and archive specific works or other subject matter
in your collection?

(b)[In particular if you arearightholder:]Have you experienced
problems with the use by libraries, educational establishments,
museum or archives of the preservation exception?

YES – Please explain, by Member State, sector, and the type
of use in question.

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

X NO

NO OPINION

If there are problems, how would they best be solved?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

If your view is that a legislative solution is needed, what
would be its main elements? Which activities of the beneficiary
institutions should be covered and under which conditions?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

If your view is that a different solution is needed, what would
it be?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Off-premises access to library collections

Directive 2001/29/EC provides an exception forthe consultation
ofworks and other subject-matter(consulting an e-book, watching
a documentary) viadedicated terminals on the premises of such
establishmentsfor the purpose of research and private study.
The online consultation ofworks and other subject-matter
remotely(i.e. when the library user is not on the premises of
the library)requires authorisation andis generallyaddressed in
agreements between universities/libraries and publishers.Some
argue that the law rather than agreements should provide for
the possibility to, and the conditions for,grantingonline
access to collections.

(a)[In particular if you are an institutional user:]Have you
experienced specific problems when trying to negotiate
agreements with rights holders that enable you to provide
remote access, including across borders, to your collections
(or parts thereof) for purposes of research and private study?

(b)[In particular if you are an end user/consumer:]Have you
experienced specific problems when trying to consult, including
across borders, works and other subject-matter held in the
collections of institutions such as universities and national
libraries when you are not on the premises of the institutions
in question?

(c)[In particular if you are aright holder:]Have you negotiated
agreements with institutional users that enable those
institutions to provide remote access, including across
borders, to the works or other subject-matter in their
collections, for purposes of research and private study?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

If there are problems, how would they best be solved?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

If your view is that a legislative solution is needed, what
would be its main elements? Which activities of the beneficiary
institutions should be covered and under which conditions?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

If your view is thatadifferent solutionisneeded, what would it
be?

[Open question]

Il n’est pas nécessaire de recourir à la voie législative. La
voie contractuelle permet de délivrer les autorisations
nécessaires et de prévoir une juste rémunération, notamment
dans le cadre d’une gestion collective

E –lending

Traditionally, public libraries haveloanedphysical copies of
works (i.e. books, sometimes also CDs and DVDs) to their users.
Recent technological developments have made it technically
possible for libraries to provide users with temporary access
to digital content, such as e-books, music or films via
networks. Under the current legal framework, libraries need to
obtain the authorisation of the rights holders to
organisesuche-lending activities. In various Member States,
publishers and libraries are currently experimenting with
different business models for the making available of works
online, including direct supply of e-books to libraries by
publishers or bundling byaggregators.

(a)[In particular if you are alibrary:]Have you experienced
specific problems when trying tonegotiate agreements to enable
the electronic lending(e-lending), including across borders, of
books or other materials held in your collection?

(b)[In particular if you are an enduser/consumer:]Haveyou
experienced specific problems when trying to borrow booksor
other materialselectronically (e-lending), including across
borders,from institutionssuch as public libraries?

(c)[In particular if you are aright holder:]Have you negotiated
agreements with libraries to enable them to lend books or other
materials electronically, including across borders?

X YES– Please explainwith specific examples

Le Ministère de la culture a récemment créé un groupe de travail
composé de représentants d’auteurs, d’éditeurs, de librairies et
de bibliothèques. A ce jour, les travaux de ce groupe
s’orientent vers une définition des offres que pourraient
effectuer directement les éditeurs aux bibliothèques dans le
cadre de prêt de livres numériques, et la rédaction d’un « code
des bons usages » pour la profession.

NO

NO OPINION

If there are problems, how would they best be solved?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

The following two questions are relevant bothtothis point (n° 3)
and the previous one (n° 2).

[In particular if you are an institutional user:]What
differences do you see in the management of physical and online
collections, including providing access to your subscribers?
What problems have you encountered?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

[In particular if you are a right holder:]What difference do you
see between libraries’traditional activities such as on-premises
consultation or public lending and activities such as
off-premises (online, at a distance) consultation and
e-lending? What problems have you encountered?

[Open question]

Mass digitisation
-----------------

The term “mass digitisation” is normally used to refer to
efforts by institutions such as libraries and archives to
digitise (e.g. scan) the entire content or part of their
collections with an objective to preserve these collections
and, normally, to make them available to the public. Examples
are efforts by libraries to digitise novels form the early part
of the 20thcentury or whole collections of pictures of
historical value. This matter has been partly addressed at the
EU level by the 2011 Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) on key
principles on the digitisationand making available of out
of commerce works (i.e. works which are no longer found in the
normal channels of commerce),which isaimingto facilitatemass
digitisation efforts (for books and learned journals) on the
basis of licence agreements between libraries and similar
cultural institutions on the one hand and the collecting
societies representing authors and publishers on the other44

You will find more information about his MoU on the following
website:http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/copyright/out-of-commerce/index_en.htm.

.Provided the required funding is ensured(digitisation projects
are extremely expensive),the result of this MoU should bethat
books that are currently to be found only in the archives of,
for instance, libraries will be digitised and made available
online to everyone.The MoU is based on voluntary licences
(granted by Collective Management Organisations on the basis of
the mandates they receive from authors and publishers). Some
Member States may need to enact legislation to ensure the
largest possible effect ofsuchlicences (e.g. by establishing in
legislation a presumption of representation of a collecting
society or the recognition of an “extended effect” to the
licences granted)45

France and Germany have already adopted legislation to back the
effects of the MoU.The French act (LOI n° 2012-287 du 1er mars
2012 relative à l'exploitation numérique des livres
indisponibles du xxe siècle) foresees collectivemanagement,
unless the author or publisher in question opposes such
management.The German act (Gesetz zur Nutzung verwaister und
vergriffener Werke und einer weiteren Änderung des
Urheberrechtsgesetzes vom 1.Oktober 2013) contains a legal
presumption of representation by a collectingsociety in
relation to works whose rightholdersare not members of the
collecting society.

.

[In particular if you are an institutional user,engaging or
wanting to engage in mass digitisation projects,a rightholder,a
collective management organisation:]Would itbe necessaryin your
country to enact legislationto ensure thattheresults of the
2011 MoU (i.e. the agreements concluded between libraries and
collecting societies) havea cross-border effect sothatout of
commerce workscan be accessedacross the EU?

En France, le législateur a adopté une loi sur les livres
indisponibles en mars 2012, qui prévoit un système de gestion
collective. Cette loi a pour objectif de rendre à nouveau
disponible le patrimoine littéraire français du XXème siècle en
instituant un système de gestion collective pour l’exploitation
de ces œuvres. Ce dispositif permet la disponibilité des œuvres
en format numérique.

YES – Please explainwhy and how it could best be achieved

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO OPINION

Would it be necessary to develop mechanisms, beyond those
already agreed for other types of content (e.g. for audio- or
audio-visual collections, broadcasters’ archives)?

 YES – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO OPINION

Teaching

Directive 2001/29/EC46

Article 5(3)aof Directive 2001/29.

enables Member States to implement in their national
legislationlimitations and exceptionsfor the purpose of
illustration fornon-commercialteaching. Such exceptions would
typically allow a teacher to use parts of or full works to
illustrate his course,e.g.by distributing copies of fragments
of a book or of newspaper articles in the classroom or by
showing protected content on a smart boardwithout having to
obtain authorisation from the right holders.The open
formulation of this (optional) provision allows for rather
different implementation at Member States level.The
implementation of the exception differs from Member State to
Member State, with several Member States providinginsteada
framework for the licensing of contentforcertain
educationaluses. Some argue that the lawshould provide for
better possibilities for distance learningand study at home.

(a)[In particular if youare an enduser/consumeror an
institutional user:]Have you experienced specific problems when
trying to use works orother subject-matter for illustration for
teaching, including across borders?

(b)[In particular if youare aright holder:]Have youexperienced
specificproblems resulting from the wayin which works or other
subject-matter are used for illustration for teaching,
including across borders?

YES–Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

X NO

NO OPINION

If there are problems, how would they best be solved?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

What mechanisms exist in the market place to facilitate the use
of content for illustration for teaching purposes?How
successful are they?

[Open question]

Il y a le droit à reprographie, ce qui permet depuis de
nombreuses années aux enseignants de distribuer des copies
d’œuvres en classes.

Et égalementune exception dite « pédagogique » dont le périmètre
défini permet

d’assurer une juste rémunération aux ayants droit.

If your view is that a legislative solution is needed, what
would be its main elements? Which activities of the beneficiary
institutions should be covered and under what conditions?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

If your view is thatadifferent solutionisneeded, what would it
be?

[Open question]

Pour ce type d’usages,la solution contractuelle est la meilleure
solution car elle apporte plus de flexibilitéet permet de fixer,
le cas échéant,une juste rémunération.

Research

Directive 2001/29/EC47

Article 5(3)a of Directive 2001/29.

enables Member States to choose whether to implement in their
national laws a limitation for the purpose of non-commercial
scientific research.Theopenformulation of this (optional)
provision allows forratherdifferent implementationsat Member
States level.

(a)[In particular if you arean enduser/consumeror an
institutional user:]Haveyou experienced specific problems when
trying to use works or other subject matter in thecontextof
research projects/activities, including across borders?

(b)[In particular if you area right holder:]Haveyouexperienced
specificproblems resulting from the wayin which works or other
subject-matter are usedin thecontextof research
projects/activities, including across borders?

YES–Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO

NO OPINION

If there are problems, how wouldtheybest be solved?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

What mechanisms exist in the Member States to facilitate the use
of content for research purposes?How successful are they?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Disabilities

Directive 2001/29/EC48

Article 5 (3)b of Directive 2001/29.

provides for an exception/limitation for the benefit of people
with a disability.The open formulation of this (optional)
provision allows for rather different implementations at Member
States level.At EU and international level projects have been
launched to increase the accessibilityof works and other
subject-matterforpersons with disabilities (notably by
increasing the number of works published in special formats and
facilitating their distribution across the European Union)49

The European Trusted Intermediaries Network (ETIN)resulting
froma Memorandum of Understanding betweenrepresentatives of the
right-holder community (publishers, authors, collecting
societies) and interested parties such as associations for
blind and dyslexic
persons(http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/copyright/initiatives/access/index_en.htm)
and the Trusted Intermediary Global Accessible Resources (TIGAR)
project in WIPO (http://www.visionip.org/portal/en/).

.

The Marrakesh Treaty50

MarrakeshTreaty to Facilitate Access to Published Works by
Visually Impaired Persons and Persons with Print
Disabilities,Marrakesh, June 17 to 282013.

has been adopted to facilitate access to published works for
persons who are blind, visually impaired, or otherwise print
disabled. The Treaty creates a mandatory exception to copyright
that allows organisations for the blind to produce, distribute
and make available accessible format copies to visually
impaired persons without the authorisation of the rightholders.
The EU and its Member Stateshave startedwork to sign and ratify
the Treaty. This may require the adoption of certain provisions
at EU level (e.g. to ensure the possibility to exchange
accessible format copies across borders).

(a)[Inparticular if you are a person with a disability or an
organisation representing persons with disabilities:]Have you
experienced problems with accessibility to content, including
across borders,arising from Member States’ implementation of
this exception?

(b)[Inparticular if you are an organisationproviding services
for persons with disabilities:]Have you experienced problems
when distributing/communicating works published in special
formats across the EU?

(c)[In particular if you are a rightholder:]Have you experienced
specificproblems resulting fromthe application of limitations or
exceptions allowing for the distribution/communication of works
published in special formats, including across borders?

YES–Please explainby giving examples

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO

NO OPINION

Ifthere are problems, what could be done to improve
accessibility?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

What mechanisms exist in the market place to facilitate
accessibility to content? How successful are they?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Text and data mining

Text and data mining/content mining/data analytics51

For the purpose of the present document, the term “text and data
mining” will be used.

are different terms used to describe increasingly important
techniques used in particular by researchers for the
exploration of vast amounts of existing texts and data (e.g.,
journals, web sites, databases etc.). Through the use of
software or other automated processes, an analysis is made of
relevant texts and data in order to obtain new insights,
patterns and trends.

The texts and data used for mining are either freely accessible
on the internet or accessible through subscriptions to e.g.
journals and periodicals that give access to the databases of
publishers. A copy is made of the relevant texts and data (e.g.
on browser cache memories or in computers RAM memories or onto
the hard disk of a computer), prior to the actual analysis.
Normally, it is considered that to mine protected works or
other subject matter, it is necessary to obtain authorisation
from the right holders for the making of such copies unless
such authorisation can be implied (e.g. content accessible to
general public without restrictions on the internet, open
access).

Some argue that the copies required for text and data mining are
covered by the exception for temporary copies in Article 5.1 of
Directive 2001/29/EC. Others consider that text and data mining
activities should not even be seen as covered by copyright. None
of thisis clear, in particular since text and data mining does
not consist only of a single method, but can be undertaken in
several different ways. Important questions also remain as to
whether the main problems arising in relation to this issue go
beyond copyright (i.e. beyond the necessity or not to obtain
the authorisation to use content) and relate rather to the need
to obtain “access” to content (i.e. being able to use e.g.
commercial databases).

A specific Working Group was set up on this issue in the
framework of the "Licences for Europe" stakeholder dialogue. No
consensus was reached among participating stakeholders on either
the problems to be addressed or the results. At the same time,
practical solutions to facilitate text and data mining of
subscription-based scientific content were presented by
publishers as an outcome of “Licences for Europe”52

See the document “Licences for Europe – tenpledges to bring more
content
online”:http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/copyright/docs/licences-for-europe/131113_ten-pledges_en.pdf.

.In the context of these discussions, other stakeholders argued
that no additional licences should be required to mine material
to which access has been provided through a
subscriptionagreement and considered that a specific exception
for text and data mining should be introduced, possibly on the
basis of a distinction between commercial and non-commercial.

(a)[In particular if you are an enduser/consumeror an
institutional user:]Haveyou experiencedobstacles,linked to
copyright,when trying to usetext or data miningmethods,
including across borders?

(b)[In particular if you are aservice provider:]Have you
experienced obstacles, linked to copyright, when providing
services based on text or data mining methods, including across
borders?

(c)[In particular if you are a rightholder:]Have you experienced
specificproblems resulting fromthe use of text and data mining
in relation to copyright protected content, including across
borders?

YES–Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO–Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO OPINION

If there are problems, how wouldtheybest be solved?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

If your view is that a legislative solution is needed, what
would be its main elements? Which activities should be covered
and under what conditions?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

If your view is thatadifferent solutionisneeded, what would it
be?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Are there other issues, unrelated to copyright, that constitute
barriers to the use of text or data mining methods?

[Open question]……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

User-generated content

Technological and service developments mean that citizens can
copy, use and distribute content at little to no financial
cost. As a consequence, new types of online activities are
developing rapidly, including the making of so-called
“user-generated content”. While users can create totally
original content, they can also take one or several
pre-existing works, change something in the work(s), and upload
the result on the Internet e.g. to platforms and blogs53

A typical example could be the “kitchen” or “wedding” video
(adding one's own video to a pre-existing sound recording), or
adding one's own text to a pre-existing photograph.Other
examples are “mash-ups” (blending two sound recordings), and
reproducing parts of journalistic work (report, review etc.) in
a blog.

. User-generated content (UGC) can thus coverthe modification of
pre-existing works even if the newly-generated/"uploaded" work
does not necessarily require a creative effort and results from
merely adding, subtracting or associating some pre-existing
content with other pre-existing content. This kind of activity
is not “new” as such. However, the development of social
networking and social media sites that enable users to share
content widely has vastly changed the scale of such activities
and increased the potential economic impact for those holding
rights in the pre-existing works. Re-use is no longer the
preserve of a technically and artistically adept elite. With
the possibilities offered by the new technologies, re-use is
open to all, at no cost. This in turn raises questions with
regard to fundamental rights such the freedom of expression and
the right to property.

A specific Working Group was set up on this issue in the
framework of the"Licences for Europe" stakeholder dialogue. No
consensuswas reachedamong participating stakeholders on either
the problems tobe addressed or the resultsor even the
definition of UGC. Nevertheless, awide range of viewswere
presentedas to the best way to respond to this phenomenon.
Oneviewwasto say that a new exception is needed to cover UGC,
in particular non-commercial activities by individuals such as
combining existing musical works with videos, sequences of
photos, etc. Anotherview wasthat no legislative change is
needed: UGCis flourishing, and licensing schemes are
increasingly available (licence schemes concluded between
rightholders and platforms as well as micro-licences concluded
between rightholders and the usersgenerating thecontent. In any
event, practical solutions to ease user-generated content and
facilitate micro-licensing for small users were pledged by
rightholders across different sectors as a result of the
“Licences for Europe” discussions54

See the document “Licences for Europe – tenpledges to bring more
content
online”:http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/copyright/docs/licences-for-europe/131113_ten-pledges_en.pdf.

.

(a)[In particular if you are an enduser/consumer:]Have you
experienced problems when trying to use pre-existing works or
other subject matter to disseminate new content on the
Internet, including across borders?

(b)[In particular if you are a service provider:]Have you
experienced problems when users publish/disseminatenew content
based on the pre-existing works or other subject-matter through
your service, including across borders?

(c)[In particular if you are a right holder:]Have you
experienced problems resulting from the way the users are using
pre-existing works or other subject-matter to disseminate new
content on the Internet, including across borders?

X YES– Please explain by giving examples

J’accepte des emprunts à condition que cela se fassedans le
respect demesœuvres, avecmonaccord et dans une démarche
créative sincère.

Pour plus de souplesse, je serais favorable à l’introduction de
la gestion collective pour rémunérer les auteurs

Je suis contre une nouvelle exception en la matière.

 NO

NO OPINION

(a)[In particular if you are an end user/consumer or a right
holder:]Have you experienced problems when trying to ensure
that the work you have created (on the basis of pre-existing
works) is properly identified for online use? Are proprietary
systems sufficient in this context?

(b)[In particular if you are a service provider:]Do you provide
possibilities for users that are publishing/disseminating the
works they have created (on the basis of pre-existing works)
through your service to properly identify these works for
online use?

 YES – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO OPINION

(a)[In particular if you are an enduser/consumeror aright
holder):]Have you experienced problems when trying to be
remunerated for the use of the work you have created (on the
basis of pre-existing works)?

(b)[In particular if you are a service provider:]Do you provide
remuneration schemes for users publishing/disseminating the
works they have created (on the basis of pre-existing works)
through your service?

 YES – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

X NO– Please explain

Les œuvres créées à partir d’une œuvre préexistante sont des
œuvres composites, dont le régime est bien connu et fonctionne
de manière tout à fait satisfaisante.

Il est naturel que l’auteur de l’œuvre préexistante soit
rémunéré et c’est ce premier point qui devrait préoccuper la
Commission. Car l’on sait que de nombreux prestataires
techniques, qui mettent à disposition des internautes toutes
sortes d’outils collaboratifs, ne font rien dans le même temps
pour essayer de garantir le respect des droits des auteurs des
œuvres préexistantes et leur assurer une rémunération. Bien au
contraire, une pratique de plus en plus répandue est de forcer
la main au créateur de l’œuvre composite pour qu’il autorise
l’exploitation la plus large de son œuvre.

S’agissant en second lieu de la rémunération de l’auteur de
l’œuvre composite, le contrat permet de régler la situation
de manière efficace, en prévoyant un partage des recettes
tirées de l’exploitation de l’œuvre. En France, les sociétés
d’auteurs qui délivrent des autorisations d’exploitation pour
le compte de leurs membres ont mis en place des procédures pour
faciliter, lorsque l’auteur de l’œuvre préexistante est membre
de la société, d’une part l’entrée en contact avec ce dernier,
d’autre part l’établissement des clés de répartition.

NO OPINION

If there are problems, how would they best be solved?

[Open question]

Le problème essentiel est celui de la captation de valeur opérée
par les prestataires de l’internet au préjudice tant de l’auteur
de l’œuvre composite que de l’auteur de l’œuvre préexistante. La
Commission pourrait utilement jouer un rôle pour convaincre ces
prestataires à développer des outils et des pratiques
permettant de rémunérer les auteurs concernés.

If your view is that a legislative solution is needed, what
would be its main elements? Which activities should be covered
and under what conditions?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

If your view is thatadifferent solutionisneeded, what would it
be?

[Open question]

Une intervention législative n’est sans doute pas le bon
instrument. Il faut inciter les parties concernées à s’entendre
sur la mise en place de mécanismes vertueux, respectueux des
droits des auteurs.

Private copying and reprography

Directive 2001/29/EC enables Member States to implement in their
national legislation exceptions or limitations to the
reproduction right for copies made for private useand
photocopying55

Article 5. 2)(a) and (b)of Directive 2001/29.

.Levies are charges imposed at national level on goods typically
used forsuch purposes(blank media, recording equipment,
photocopying machines, mobile listening devices such as mp3/mp4
players, computers, etc.) with a viewtocompensating rightholders
forthe harm they suffer whencopiesaremade
withouttheirauthorisation by certain categories of persons
(i.e. natural persons making copies for their private use)
orthrough use of certain technique (i.e. reprography).In that
context, levies are important for rightholders.

With the constant developments in digital technology, the
question arises as to whether the copying of files by
consumers/end-users who have purchased content online - e.g.
when a person has bought an MP3 fileandgoes on
tostoremultiplecopies of thatfile(in her computer, her tablet
and her mobile phone) -alsotriggers, or should trigger,the
application of private copying levies. It is argued that, in
some cases,these leviesmay indeedbe claimedby
rightholderswhetheror notthelicence feepaid by the service
provideralready covers copies made bythe enduser.
Thisapproachcould potentially lead to instances of double
payments whereby levies could be claimed on top ofservice
providers’licencefees56

Communication "Unleashing the Potential of Cloud Computing in
Europe", COM(2012) 529 final.

57

These issues were addressed in the recommendations of Mr António
Vitorino resulting from the mediation on private copying and
reprography levies.Youcan consult these recommendationson the
following
website:http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/copyright/docs/levy_reform/130131_levies-vitorino-recommendations_en.pdf.

.

There is also an on-going discussion as to the application or
not of levies to certain types of cloud-based services such as
personal lockers or personal video recorders.

In your view, is there a need to clarify at the EU level the
scope and application of theprivate copyingand
reprographyexceptions58

Art. 5.2(a) and 5.2(b) of Directive 2001/29/EC.

in the digital environment?

YES–Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

X NO– Please explain

Il n’y a aucun besoin de modifier le système mis en place, pour
les titulaires de droits et créateurs aussi bien que les
consommateurs, si ce n’est lui apporter certaines
améliorations. En tout état de cause, l’exception de copie
privée doit faire obligatoirement l’objet d’une compensation
pour les titulaires de droits. Le système doit s’étendre aux
usages numériques et à certains services du cloud, dans la
mesure où ils permettent de faire des copies privées d’une
ampleur encore jamais égalée. En tout étatde cause, les
titulaires des droits doivent percevoir une rémunération
appropriée pour l’utilisation de leurs œuvres protégées.

NO OPINION

Should digital copies made by end users for private purposes in
the context of a service that has been licensed by
rightholders, and where theharmto the rightholder is minimal,
be subject to private copying levies?59

This issue was also addressed in the recommendations of Mr
Antonio Vitorino resulting from the mediation on private
copying and reprography levies

X YES– Please explain

En matière de copie privée, chaque acte en lui-même cause un
préjudice minime à chaque ayant droit, mais c’est la
conjonction de l’ensemble de ces actes qui est à prendre en
considération et justifie ce droit à rémunération, au nom d’un
juste partage de la valeur.

 NO – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO OPINION

How would changes in levies with respect to the application
toonline services (e.g.services based oncloud computing
allowing, for instance, usersto have copieson different
devices)impactthe development and functioning ofnewbusiness
modelson the one hand and rightholders’ revenue on the other?

[Open question]

Il paraît normal que des actes accomplis grâce au développement
des services du cloud, constituant sans conteste des actes de
copie privée, soient assujettis au même régime que les copies
privées effectuées sur des tablettes tactiles, téléphones
portables ou autres équipements.

Would you see an added value in making levies visibleon the
invoices for products subject to levies?60

This issue was also addressed in the recommendations of Mr
Antonio Vitorino resulting from the mediation on private
copying and reprography levies.

X YES– Please explain

NO–Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO OPINION

Divergingnational systems levy different products and apply
different tariffs. This results in obstacles tothefree
circulation of goods and servicesin the Single Market.At the
same time,many Member States continue to allowtheindiscriminate
application of private copying levies to all transactions
irrespective of the person to whom the product subject to a
levyis sold(e.g. private person or business). In that context,
not all Member States have ex ante exemption and/or ex post
reimbursement schemes which could remedy these situations and
reduce the number of undue payments61

This issue was also addressed in the recommendations of Mr
Antonio Vitorino resulting from the mediation on private
copying and reprography levies.

.

Have you experienced a situation whereacross-border transaction
resulted inundue levy payments, or duplicate payments of the
same levy, or other obstacles to the free movement of goods or
services?

YES–Pleasespecify the type of transaction and indicate
thepercentageoftheundue payments. Please also indicatehow a
priori exemption and/orex post reimbursement schemes could help
to remedy the situation.

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

X NO– Please explain

Afin d’éviter tout risque de ce type, il serait souhaitable au
niveau européen que soit précisé de manière explicite que la
rémunération doit être acquittée dans le pays de résidence de
l’acheteur du matériel au service assujetti (v. CJUE arrêt dans
l’affaire C-462/09 décision Opus du 16 juin 2011). De même,
serait-il nécessaire de clarifier en cas de problème, que le
litige devrait être réglé dans et conformément aux règles du
pays où ce droit est collecté.

NO OPINION

What percentage of products subject to a levy is sold to persons
other than natural persons for purposes clearly unrelated to
private copying? Do any of those transactions result in undue
payments? Please explain in detail the example you provide
(type of products, type of transaction, stakeholders, etc.).

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Where such undue payments arise, what percentage of trade do
they affect? To what extent could a priori exemptionsand/orex
post reimbursement schemes existing in some Member States help
to remedy the situation?

[Open question]

Les propositions faites et réitérées à plusieurs reprises par
les titulaires de droits apportent des réponses à ces
questions.

Ifyou have identified specificproblemswith the current
functioning of the levy system, howwould these
problemsbestbesolved?

[Open question]

Fairremuneration of authors and performers

TheEUcopyrightacquisrecognises for authors and performers a
number of exclusive rights and, in the case of performers whose
performances are fixed in phonograms, remuneration rights. There
are few provisions in the EU copyright law governing
thetransferof rights from authors or performers to producers62

See e.g. Directive 92/100/EEC, Art.2(4)-(7).

or determining who the owner of the rights is when the work or
other subject matter is created in the context of an employment
contract63

See e.g.Art. 2.3. of Directive 2009/24/EC,Art. 4 of Directive
96/9/EC.

. Thisis an area that has been traditionally left for Member
States to regulate and there are significant differences in
regulatory approaches.Substantial differences also exist
between different sectors of the creative industries.

Concerns continue to be raised that authors and performers are
not adequately remunerated, in particular but not solely, as
regards online exploitation. Many consider that the economic
benefit of new forms of exploitation is not being fairly shared
along the whole value chain. Another commonly raised issue
concerns contractual practices, negotiation mechanisms,
presumptions of transfer of rights, buy-out clauses and the
lack of possibility to terminate contracts. Some stakeholders
are of the opinion that rules at national level do not suffice
to improve their situation and that action at EU level is
necessary.

[In particular if you arean author/performer:] What is the best
mechanism (or combination of mechanisms) to ensure that you
receive an adequate remuneration for the exploitation of your
works and performances?

[Open question]

Le principe de la rémunération proportionnelle est une règle
essentielle pour assurer aux auteurs la plus haute rémunération
en les associant au succès de l’exploitation et de la diffusion
de leurs œuvres.

Je suis favorable à ce que ce pourcentagesoit accompagné d’un
minimum garanti par achat d’exemplaire ou par accès à l’œuvre.

Je suis favorable à une gestion collective à même d’assurerune
nécessairetransparence de la rémunération àmerevenir au titre
de l’utilisation demesœuvres.

Is there a need to act at the EU level (for instance to prohibit
certain clauses in contracts)?

X YES– Please explain

L’Union Européenne pourrait fixer certaines lignes directrices
dans le cas où l’auteur se verrait proposer des contrats de
cession exclusifs, parfois coercitifs et pour la durée de la
protection, soit 70 ans post-mortem.

Dans la plupart des situations, les auteurs sont dans
l’incapacité de véritablement négocier des contrats de
cession dont les termes sont totalement imposés par les
éditeurs ou les producteurs diffuseurs des œuvres. Dans ces
cas, il s’agit pour nombre d’auteurs d’accepter ou de refuser
de simples contrats d’adhésion, non négociables sur des clauses
aussi essentielles que la durée de cession (souvent confondue
dans les contrats avec ladurée de protection), sur l’étendue de
la cession (généralement le monde), sur les droits
d’exploitation cédés (tous sans aucune obligation
d’exploitation effective des droits ainsi cédés).

En l’état actuel des pratiques, il n’y a aucune obligation
contractuelle que les comptes envoyés aux auteurs soient
équitables, transparents et réels.

En l’état actuel, il n’y a pas de possibilité simple et
raisonnable de sortir d’un contrat d’édition au-delà d’une
certaine durée, alors que plus aucune exploitation n’est faite
ou que plus aucune somme n’est versée à l’auteur.

NO–Please explainwhy

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO OPINION

Ifyou consider that the current rules are not effective, what
would you suggest to addresstheshortcomingsyou identify?

[Open question]

L’Union Européenne pourrait utilement obliger les états membres
à organiser les négociations interprofessionnelles
nécessaires, par secteurs, entre les organisations
représentatives des auteurs et celles représentatives des
éditeurs et/ou producteurs. La discussion ou la négociation de
contrats type entre partenaires sociaux changerait profondément
la situation européenne actuelle.

Cette démarche serait cohérente si l’Union Européenneveut
prétendreassurer un haut niveau de protection aux créateurs
afin de leur permettre que leurs activités s’épanouissent au
bénéfice de la pluralité culturelle en Europe.

Respectforrights

Directive 2004/48/EE64

Directive 2004/48/EC of the European Parliament and of the
Council of 29 April 2004 on the enforcement of intellectual
property rights.

provides for a harmonised framework for the civil enforcement of
intellectual property rights, including copyright and related
rights. The Commission has consulted broadly on this text65

You will find more information on the following
website:http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/iprenforcement/directive/index_en.htm

. Concerns have been raised as to whether some of its provisions
are still fit to ensure a proper respect for copyright in the
digital age. On the one hand, the current measures seem to be
insufficient to deal with the new challenges brought by the
dissemination of digital content on the internet; on the other
hand, there are concerns about the current balance between
enforcement of copyright and the protection of fundamental
rights, in particular the right for a private life and data
protection. While it cannot be contested that enforcement
measures should always be available in case of infringement of
copyright, measures could be proposed to strengthen respect for
copyright when the infringed content is used for a commercial
purpose66

For example when the infringing content is offered on a website
which gets advertising revenues that depend on the volume of
traffic.

. One means to do this could be to clarify the roleof
intermediaries in the IP infrastructure67

This clarification should not affect the liability regime of
intermediary service providers established by Directive
2000/31/EC on electronic commerce, which will remain unchanged.

. At the same time,there could beclarification of the
safeguardsforrespect of private life and data protection for
private users.

Shouldthe civil enforcement system in the EU be rendered more
efficient for infringements of copyright committed with a
commercial purpose?

X YES– Please explain

NO–Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO OPINION

In particular, is the current legal framework clear enough to
allow for sufficient involvement of intermediaries (such as
Internet service providers, advertising brokers, payment
service providers, domain name registrars, etc.) in inhibiting
online copyright infringements with a commercial purpose? If
not, what measures would be useful to foster the cooperation of
intermediaries?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Does the current civil enforcement framework ensure that the
right balance is achieved between the right to have one’s
copyright respected and other rights such as the protection of
private life and protection of personal data?

 YES – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO OPINION

A single EU Copyright Title

The idea ofestablishing aunifiedEU CopyrightTitlehas been
presentin the copyright debate for quite some time now,
although views as to the merits and the feasibility of such an
objective are divided. A unified EU Copyright Title would
totally harmonise the area of copyright law in the EU and
replace national laws. There would then be a single EU title
instead of a bundle of national rights. Some see this as the
only manner in which a truly Single Market for content
protected by copyright can be ensured, while others believe
that thesame objective can better be achieved by establishing a
higher level of harmonisation while allowing for a certain
degree of flexibility and specificity in Member States’ legal
systems.

Should the EU pursue the establishment of a single EU Copyright
Title, as a means of establishing a consistent framework for
rights and exceptions to copyright across the EU, as well as a
single framework for enforcement?

YES

X NO

NO OPINION

Should this be the next step in the development of copyright in
the EU? Does the current level of difference among the Member
State legislation mean that this is a longer term project?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Other issues

The above questionnaire aims to provide a comprehensive
consultation on the most important matters relating to the
current EU legal framework for copyright. Should any important
matters have been omitted, we would appreciate if you could
bring them to our attention, so they can be properly addressed
in the future.

Are there any other important matters related to the EU legal
framework forcopyright?Pleaseexplainandindicatehow such matters
should be addressed.

[Open quest

Je trouve INADMISSIBLE que ce questionnaire très technique soit
uniquement rédigé en langue anglaise alors que le droit
européen stipule que TOUS les citoyens de l’UE doivent pouvoir
avoir accès à la législation qui les concerne dans la langue de
leur pays.

-Lequestionnaire fait référence au seul copyright et non au
droit d’auteur (author right) auquel les auteurs français sont
très attachés.

- L’extrême technicité du document le rend difficilement
compréhensible par la plupart des auteurs. Il est dommage que
leur avis sur leur pratique soit confisqué au profit de groupes
de pression mieux organisés pour répondre.

- De nombreuses questions sont biaisées. Il est difficile d’y
répondre.

