


Public Consultation

on the review of the EU copyright rules

Contents

I.  Introduction  2

A.  Context of the consultation  2

B.  How to submit replies to this questionnaire  3

C.  Confidentiality  3

II.  Rights and the functioning of the Single Market  7

A.  Why is it not possible to access many online content
services from anywhere in Europe?  7

B.  Is there a need for more clarity as regards the scope of
what needs to be authorised (or not) in digital transmissions?
10

1.  The act of “making available”  10

2.  Two rights involved in a single act of exploitation  11

3.  Linking and browsing  12

4.  Download to own digital content  13

C.  Registration of works and other subject matter – is it a
good idea?  14

D.  How to improve the use and interoperability of identifiers
15

E.  Term of protection – is it appropriate?  15

III.  Limitations and exceptions in the Single Market  16

A.  Access to content in libraries and archives  19

1.  Preservation and archiving  19

2.  Off-premises access to library collections  20

3.  E – lending  21

4.  Mass digitisation  22

B.  Teaching  23

C.  Research  25

D.  Disabilities  25

E.  Text and data mining  27

F.  User-generated content  28

IV.  Private copying and reprography  31

V.  Fair remuneration of authors and performers  33

VI.  Respect for rights  34

VII.  A single EU Copyright Title  36

VIII.  Other issues  36

Introduction

Context of the consultation

Over the last two decades, digital technology and the Internet
have reshaped the ways in which content is created,
distributed, and accessed. New opportunities have materialised
for those that create and produce content (e.g. a film, a
novel, a song), for new and existing distribution platforms,
for institutions such as libraries, for activities such as
research and for citizens who now expect to be able to access
content – for information, education or entertainment purposes
– regardless of geographical borders.

This new environment also presents challenges. One of them is
for the market to continue to adapt to new forms of
distribution and use. Another one is for the legislator to
ensure that the system of rights, limitations to rights and
enforcement remains appropriate and is adapted to the new
environment. This consultation focuses on the second of these
challenges: ensuring that the EU copyright regulatory framework
stays fit for purpose in the digital environment to support
creation and innovation, tap the full potential of the Single
Market, foster growth and investment in our economy and promote
cultural diversity.

In its "Communication on Content in the Digital Single Market"1

COM (2012)789 final, 18/12/2012.

the Commission set out two parallel tracks of action:on the one
hand, to complete its on-going effort to review and to
modernise the EU copyright legislative framework2

As announced in the Intellectual Property Strategy ' A single
market for Intellectual Property Rights: COM (2011)287 final,
24/05/2011.

3

"Based on market studies and impact assessment and legal
drafting work"as announced in the Communication (2012)789.

with a view to a decision in 2014 on whether to table
legislative reform proposals, andon the other, to facilitate
practical industry-led solutions through the stakeholder
dialogue "Licences for Europe" on issues on which rapid
progress was deemed necessary and possible.

The "Licences for Europe" process has been finalised now4

See the document “Licences for Europe – tem pledges to bring
more content
online”:http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/copyright/docs/licences-for-europe/131113_ten-pledges_en.pdf.

. The Commission welcomes the practical solutions stakeholders
have put forward in this context and will monitor their
progress. Pledges have been made by stakeholders in all four
Working Groups (cross border portability of services,
user-generated content, audiovisual and film heritage and text
and data mining). Taken together, the Commission expects these
pledges to be a further step in making the user environment
easier in many different situations. The Commission also takes
note of the fact that two groups – user-generated content and
text and data mining – did not reach consensus among
participating stakeholders on either the problems to be
addressed or on the results. The discussions and results of
"Licences for Europe" will be also taken into account in the
context of the review of the legislative framework.

As part of the review process, the Commission is now launching a
public consultation on issues identified in the Communication on
Content in the Digital Single Market, i.e.:"territoriality in
the Internal Market, harmonisation, limitations and exceptions
to copyright in the digital age; fragmentation of the EU
copyright market; and how to improve the effectiveness and
efficiency of enforcement while underpinning its legitimacy in
the wider context of copyright reform". As highlighted in the
October 2013 European CouncilConclusions5

EUCO 169/13, 24/25 October 2013.

"Providing digital services and content across the single market
requires the establishment of a copyright regime for the digital
age. The Commission will therefore complete its on-going review
of the EU copyright framework in spring 2014. It is important
to modernise Europe's copyright regime and facilitate
licensing, while ensuring a high level protection of
intellectual property rights and taking into account cultural
diversity".

This consultation builds on previous consultations and public
hearings, in particular those on the "Green Paper on copyright
in the knowledge economy"6

COM(2008)
466/3,http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/copyright/copyright-infso/index_en.htm#maincontentSec2.

, the "Green Paper on the online distribution of audiovisual
works"7

COM(2011) 427
final,http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/consultations/2011/audiovisual_en.htm.

and "Content Online"8

http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/consultations/2009/content_online_en.htm.

. These consultations provided valuable feedback from
stakeholders on a number of questions, on issues as diverse as
the territoriality of copyright and possible ways to overcome
territoriality, exceptions related to the online dissemination
of knowledge, and rightholders’ remuneration, particularly in
the audiovisual sector. Views were expressed by stakeholders
representing all stages in the value chain, including right
holders, distributors, consumers, and academics. The questions
elicited widely diverging views on the best way to proceed. The
"Green Paper on Copyright in the Knowledge Economy" was followed
up by a Communication. The replies to the "Green Paper on the
online distribution of audiovisual works" have fed into
subsequent discussions on the Collective Rights Management
Directive and into the current review process.

How to submit replies to this questionnaire

You are kindly asked to send your repliesby 5 February 2014in a
MS Word, PDF or OpenDocument format to the following e-mail
address of DG Internal Market and
Services:markt-copyright-consultation@ec.europa.eu. Please note
that replies sent after that date will not be taken into
account.

This consultation is addressed to different categories of
stakeholders. To the extent possible, the questions indicate
the category/ies of respondents most likely to be concerned by
them (annotation in brackets, before the actual question).
Respondents should nevertheless feel free to reply to any/all
of the questions. Also, please note that, apart from the
question concerning the identification of the respondent, none
of the questions is obligatory. Replies containing answers only
to part of the questions will be also accepted.

You are requested to provide your answers directly within this
consultation document. For the “Yes/No/No opinion” questions
please put the selected answer inboldandunderlineit so it is
easy for us to see your selection.

In your answers to the questions, you are invited to refer to
the situation in EU Member States.You are also invited in
particular to indicate, where relevant, what would be the
impact of options you put forward in terms of costs,
opportunities and revenues.

The public consultation is available in English. Responses may,
however, be sent in any of the 24 official languages of the EU.

Confidentiality

The contributions received in this round of consultation as well
as a summary report presenting the responses in a statistical
and aggregated form will be published on the website of DG
MARKT.

Please note that all contributions received will be published
together with the identity of the contributor, unless the
contributor objects to the publication of their personal data
on the grounds that such publication would harm his or her
legitimate interests. In this case, the contribution will be
published in anonymous form upon the contributor's explicit
request. Otherwise the contribution will not be published nor
will its content be reflected in the summary report.

Pleaseread ourPrivacy statement.

Introduction

Please identify yourself:

Name:

Bitte ergänzen (Name, Komponist/Herausgeber)

In the interests of transparency, organisations (including, for
example, NGOs, trade associations and commercial enterprises)
are invited to provide the public with relevant information
about themselves by registering in the Interest Representative
Register and subscribing to its Code of Conduct.

If you are a Registered organisation, please indicate your
Register ID number below. Your contribution will then be
considered as representing the views of your organisation.

…Nicolaus A. HUBER
Komponist………………………………………………………………………………………………..

…………………………………………………………………………………………………..

If your organisation is not registered, you have the opportunity
toregister now.Responses from organisations not registered will
be published separately.

If you would like to submit your reply on an anonymous basis
please indicate it belowby underlining the following answer:

Yes, I would like to submit my reply on an anonymous basis

Type of respondent(Pleaseunderlinethe appropriate):

End user/consumer(e.g.internet user,reader, subscriber to
musicor audiovisualservice, researcher,student)ORRepresentative
of end users/consumers

for the purposes of this questionnaire normally referred to
in questions as"end users/consumers"

Institutional user(e.g. school,university, research centre,
library, archive)ORRepresentative of institutional users

for the purposes of this questionnaire normally referred to
in questions as"institutional users"

Author/Performer OR Representative of authors/performers

Producer/Composer

the two above categoriesare,for the purposes of this
questionnaire, normally referred to in questions as"right
holders"

Intermediary/Distributor/Other service provider(e.g. online
music or audiovisual service, games platform,social media,
search engine, ICT industry)OR Representative of
intermediaries/distributors/other service providers

for the purposes of this questionnaire normally referred to
in questionsas"service providers"

Collective Management Organisation

Public authority

Member State

Other(Please explain):

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Rights and the functioning of the Single Market

Why is it not possible to accessmany online content servicesfrom
anywhere in Europe?

[In particular if you are an end user/consumer:]Have you faced
problems whentryingto access online services in an EU Member
State other than the one in which you live?

YES - Please provide examples indicating the Member State,
the sector and the type of content concerned (e.g. premium
content such as certain films and TV series, audio-visual
content in general, music, e-books, magazines, journals and
newspapers, games, applications and other software)

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO

NO OPINION

[In particular if you area service provider:]Have you faced
problems when seeking to provide online services across
bordersin the EU?

YES - Please explain whether such problems, in your
experience, are related to copyright or to other issues (e.g.
business decisions relating to the cost of providing services
across borders, compliance with other laws such as consumer
protection)? Please provide examples indicating the Member
State, the sector and the type of content concerned (e.g.
premium content such as certain films and TV series,
audio-visual content in general, music, e-books, magazines,
journals and newspapers, games, applications and other
software).

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO

NO OPINION

[In particular if you are a right holder or a collective
management organisation:]How often are you asked to grant
multi-territorial licences? Please indicate, if possible, the
number of requests per year and provide examples indicating the
Member State, the sector and the type of content concerned.

[Open question]

Der weitaus größte Teil dieser Fälle wird durch die
Verwertungsgesellschaften bearbeitet

…………………………………………………………………………….

If you have identified problems in the answers to any of the
questions above – what would be the best way to tackle them?

[Open question]

Am besten ist es, die Rechte von Verwertungsgesellschaften
wahrnehmen zu lassen, die durch Gegenseitigkeitsverträge
international verbunden sind und deshalb über ein inhaltlich
und räumlich umfassendes Rechterepertoire verfügen……………

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

[In particular if you area right holder or acollective
management organisation:]Are there reasons why, even in cases
where you hold all the necessary rights for all the territories
in question, you would still find it necessary or justified to
impose territorial restrictions on a service provider (in
order, for instance, to ensure that access to certain content
is not possible in certain European countries)?

X YES– Please explain by giving examples

Die Vergütung für die Nutzung von Rechten hängt vom Umfang der
Nutzung ab. Je kleiner das Territorium, in dem die Rechte
genutzt werden, desto geringer ist das Nutzungsentgelt. Auf
diese Weise können wir Nutzung, die in kleinem Rahmen
stattfindet, durch Einschränkung des Territoriums mit niedrigen
Gebühren unterstützen.

NO

NO OPINION

[In particular if you aree.g. a broadcasteror a service
provider:]Are there reasons why, even in cases where you have
acquired all the necessary rights for all the territories in
question, you would still find it necessary or justified to
impose territorial restrictions on the service recipient (in
order for instance, to redirect the consumer to a different
website than the one he is trying to access)?

 YES – Please explain by giving examples

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO

 NO OPINION

Do you think that further measures (legislative or
non-legislative, including market-led solutions) are needed at
EU level to increase the cross-border availability of content
services in the Single Market, while ensuring an adequate level
ofprotection for right holders?

YES – Please explain

Durch Einführung von Mindeststandards zum Schutz des geistigen
Eigentums für die gesamte EU, die von nationalen Gesetzen nicht
unterschritten werden dürfen, könnenWerke in der gesamten EU
einheitlich genutzt werden, ohne dass den Rechteinhabern die
faire Vergütung verwehrt wird.

NO – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO OPINION

Is there a need for more clarity as regards the scope of what
needs to be authorised (or not) in digital transmissions?

Isthe scope of the“making available”right in cross-border
situations – i.e. when content is disseminated across borders
–sufficiently clear?

 YES

NO–Pleaseexplain how this could be clarified and what
typeofclarification would be required(e.g.as in "targeting"
approach explained above,as in "country of origin"approach9

The objective of implementing a “country of origin”approachis to
localise the copyright relevant act that must be licenced in a
single Member State (the "country of origin", which could be
for example the Member State in whichthe content is uploaded or
wherethe service provider is established), regardless of in how
many Member States the work canbe accessed or received. Such an
approachhas already been introduced at EU level with regard to
broadcasting by satellite(seeDirective 93/83/EEC on the
coordination of certain rules concerning copyright and rights
related to copyright applicable to satellite broadcasting and
cable retransmission).

)

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO OPINION

[In particular if you are a right holder:]Could a clarification
of the territorial scope of the “making available” right have
an effect on the recognition of your rights (e.g. whether you
are considered to be an author or not, whether you are
considered to have transferred your rights or not),onyour
remuneration, oron the enforcement of rights (including the
availability of injunctive relief10

Injunctive relief is a temporary or permanent remedy allowing
the right holder to stop or prevent an infringement of his/her
right.

)?

 YES– Please explain howsuchpotential effectscould
beaddressed

In den Erwägungsgründen sollte klargestellt werden, dass das
Recht grundsätzlich für jeden Mitgliedstaat, für den das Werk
bestimmungsgemäß bereitgestellt und von dem aus es
bestimmungsgemäß abgerufen werden kann, erworben und vergütet
werden muss.

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO

NO OPINION

Two rights involved in a single act of exploitation

[In particular if youa service provider or a right holder:]Does
the application of two rights to a single act of economic
exploitation in the online environment (e.g. a download) create
problems for you?

YES – Please explainwhat type of measureswould be needed in
order to address such problems (e.g. facilitation of joint
licences when the rights are in different hands,legislation to
achieve the "bundling of rights")

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

X NO

NO OPINION

Linking and browsing

Should the provision of a hyperlink leading to a work or other
subject matter protected under copyright,either in generalor
under specific circumstances,besubject to the authorisation of
the rightholder?

 YES– Please explain whether you consider this to be the case
in general, or under specificcircumstances, and why

Ja, wenn es nicht beim üblichen Hinweis einer Fundstelle bleibt.
Es ist nicht einzusehen, warum derjenige, der sein Werk ins Netz
stellt und auf seiner Webseite zugänglich macht, selbst
zusätzlich technische Schutzmaßnahmen oder dergleichen
einsetzen muss, damit Dritte sich nicht seiner Werke im Wege
von Links bedienen, während der Linksetzer es ohne Aufwand bei
der Angabe der Fundstelle belassen kann, damit Interessenten
direkt auf die fremde Webseite zugehen können.Das betrifft
insbesondere das Framing.

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO – Please explainwhether you consider this to be the case
in general,or under specific circumstances, and why(e.g.
because it does not amount to an act of communication to the
public – or to a new public, or because it should be covered by
a copyright exception)

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO OPINION

Should the viewing of a web-page where this impliesthetemporary
reproduction of a work or other subject matter protected under
copyrighton the screen and in thecache memory of the user’s
computer,either in general or under specific circumstances, be
subject to the authorisation of the rightholder?

 YES– Please explainwhether you consider this to be the case
in general, or under specific circumstances, and why

Ja, wenn damit körperliche Werkexemplare und deren Verbreitung
von bloßen Werkübermittlungen ersetzt werden, z.B.
Cloud-Computing, Streaming etc. Außerdem gibt es zunehmend
Geschäftsmodelle, die Lücken der bestehenden Gesetzeslage
ausnutzen, um den Erwerb der Rechte und eine Vergütung der
Urheber und Rechtsinhaber zu vermeiden, z.B.
Internet-Videorecorder, E-Mail-Versand. Es muss deshalb auch am
unmittelbaren Werkgenuss angeknüpft werden, um auch solche
Nutzungen erfassen zu können.Dazu zählt auch die Nutzung am
Bildschirm.

………………………………………………………………………….

 NO – Please explainwhether you consider this to be the case
in general,or under specific circumstances, andwhy(e.g. because
it isor should be covered by a copyright exception)

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO OPINION

Download to own digital content

[In particular if you arean end user/consumer:]Haveyou
facedrestrictions when trying to reselldigital files that you
havepurchased (e.g.mp3 file,e-book)?

YES–Please explainby giving examples

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO

NO OPINION

[In particular if you area right holder or a service provider:]
What would bethe consequencesof providing a legal framework
enabling the resale of previously purchased digital content?
Please specify per market (type of content) concerned.

[Open question]

“Gebrauchte” digitale Dateien unterliegen nicht der Abnutzung
und unterscheiden sich daher nicht von “neuen” digitalen
Dateien. Es wäre allerdings zu erwarten, dass Autoren und
andere Rechteinhaber am Verkauf der „gebrauchten“ Dateien nicht
beteiligt würden. Damit würde ein unfairer Wettbewerb zwischen
Anbietern, die die Autoren fair beteiligen und solchen
Anbietern, die das nicht tun, entstehen. Außerdem lassen sich
„gebrauchte“ Dateien beliebig oft ohne Qualitätsverlust
kopieren, so dass in der Praxis ein Missbrauch, der sich kaum
verhindern oder aufdecken ließe, nicht verhindern
ließe.……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Registration of works and other subject matter – is it a good
idea?

Would the creation of a registration system at EU level help in
the identification and licensing of works and other subject
matter?

YES

X NO

NO OPINION

What would bethe possible advantagesof such a system?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

What would bethe possible disadvantagesof such a system?

[Open question]

Erhöhter bürokratischer Aufwand; Nachteile für Autoren, die ohne
professionelle Hilfe arbeiten und die erforderlichen Anmeldungen
nicht selbst vornehmen können. Ein solches System würde große
Anbieter bevorzugen, die den damit verbundenen Aufwand leichter
bewältigen können. Da heute bereits die
Verwertungsgesellschaften, die jeden Autor vertreten, auch wenn
er nicht professionell unterstützt wird, umfangreiche
Werkdatenbanken unterhalten und ausbauen, ist der zusätzliche
Aufwand für ein zentrales System nicht erforderlich. Außerdem
wäre ein EU-System nicht vollständig, da es für Werke
außerhalb der EU nicht gelten könnte. Damit gäbe es ein
„Zwei-Klassen-System“ für Urheberrechte.

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

What incentives forregistrationbyrightholderscould be envisaged?

[Open question]

Die Registrierung könnte von Unberechtigten missbräuchlich
vorgenommen werden. Daher wären Rechteinhaber gezwungen, die
korrekte Registrierung selbst vorzunehmen, um sich damit gegen
missbräuchliche Eintragungen zu schützen.….

How to improve theuse andinteroperability ofidentifiers

What should be the role of the EU in promoting the adoption
of identifiers in the content sector, and in promoting the
development and interoperability of rights ownership and
permissions databases?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Term of protection – is it appropriate?

Are the current terms of copyright protection still appropriate
in the digital environment?

X YES– Please explain

Schutzfristen setzen einen Anreiz für kreatives Schaffen und für
Investitionen in kreative Inhalte.Das gilt auch für
Investitionen im digitalen Umfeld.

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO – Please explain if they should be longer or shorter

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO OPINION

Limitations and exceptions in the Single Market

Are there problems arising from the fact that most limitations
and exceptions provided in the EUcopyright directivesare
optionalfor the Member States?

YES – Please explain by referring to specific cases

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO OPINION

Should some/all of the exceptions be made mandatory and, if so,
is there aneed for a higher level of harmonisation of such
exceptions?

YES–Please explain byreferringto specific cases

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO–Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO OPINION

Should any newlimitations andexceptions be added toor removed
fromthe existing catalogue?Please explain by referring to
specific cases.

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Independently from the questions above, is there a need to
provide for a greater degree of flexibility in the EU
regulatory framework for limitations and exceptions?

YES – Please explain why

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO – Please explain why

Größere Flexibilität würde im Zweifel dazu führen, dass große
Unternehmen mit großer Marktmacht Ausnahmeregelungen erzwingen
– wie das Beispiel der Auseinandersetzung zwischen Google und
den Verleger- und Autorenverbänden im Hinblick auf das Scannen
von Büchern zeigt. Die Schranken des Urheberrechts müssen für
jeden in gleichem Maße
gelten.……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO OPINION

If yes, what would be the best approach to provide for
flexibility? (e.g.interpretation by national courts and the
ECJ, periodic revisions of the directives, interpretations by
the Commission, built-in flexibility, e.g. in the form of a
fair-useor fair dealingprovision / open norm, etc.)?Please
explain indicating what would be the relative advantages and
disadvantages of such an approach as well as its possible
effects on the functioning of the Internal Market.

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Does the territoriality of limitations and exceptions, in your
experience,constitute a problem?

 YES–Please explain why andspecify which exceptions you are
referring to

Probleme gibt es hier im Bereich der Privatkopie sowohl
hinsichtlich der Urheber, die in manchen Ländern leer ausgehen,
als auch hinsichtlich der Vergütungsschuldner (z.B. der
Geräteindustrie), die die unterschiedliche Gesetzeslage für
sich ausnutzen.

NO–Please explainwhy andspecify which exceptions you are
referring to

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO OPINION

In the event that limitationsand exceptionsestablished at
national level were to have cross-border effect, howshouldthe
question of “fair compensation” be addressed, whensuch
compensation is part of the exception? (e.g. who pays whom,
where?)

[Open question]

Die immer wieder geforderte generelle„Fair Use“Ausnahme nach
Vorbild der USA ist abzulehnen. Der Vergleich mit der
Rechtslage in den USA zeigt, dass klar definierte Ausnahmen und
Schrankenbestimmungen einer unbestimmten „Fair Use“-Ausnahme in
den Fragen der Rechtssicherheit und Investitionssicherheit
überlegen sind. Fair Use nützt nur denen, die die Ressourcen
haben, um langwierige Gerichtsverfahren durchzustehen.

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Access to content in libraries and archivesPreservationand
archiving

(a)[In particular if you arean institutional user:]Have you
experienced specific problems when trying to use an exception
to preserve and archive specific works or other subject matter
in your collection?

(b)[In particular if you arearightholder:]Have you experienced
problems with the use by libraries, educational establishments,
museum or archives of the preservation exception?

YES – Please explain, by Member State, sector, and the type
of use in question.

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO

NO OPINION

If there are problems, how would they best be solved?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

If your view is that a legislative solution is needed, what
would be its main elements? Which activities of the beneficiary
institutions should be covered and under which conditions?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

If your view is thatadifferent solutionisneeded, what would it
be?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Off-premises access to library collections

(a)[In particular if you are an institutional user:]Have you
experienced specific problems when trying to negotiate
agreements with rights holders that enable you to provide
remote access, including across borders,to your collections (or
parts thereof) for purposes of research and private study?

(b)[Inparticular if you are an enduser/consumer:]Have you
experienced specific problems when trying to consult, including
across borders,works and other subject-matter held in the
collections of institutions such as universities and national
libraries when you are not on the premises of the institutions
in question?

(c)[In particular if you are arightholder:]Have you negotiated
agreements with institutional users that enable those
institutions to provide remote access, including across
borders,to the works or other subject-matter in their
collections, for purposes of research and private study?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

If there are problems, how would they best be solved?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

If your view is that a legislative solution is needed, what
would be its main elements? Which activities of the beneficiary
institutions should be covered and under which conditions?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

If your view is thatadifferent solutionisneeded, what would it
be?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

E –lending

.

(a)[In particular if you are alibrary:]Have you experienced
specific problems when trying tonegotiate agreements to enable
the electronic lending(e-lending), including across borders, of
books or other materials held in your collection?

(b)[In particular if you are an enduser/consumer:]Haveyou
experienced specific problems when trying to borrow booksor
other materialselectronically (e-lending), including across
borders,from institutionssuch as public libraries?

(c)[In particular if you are aright holder:]Have you negotiated
agreements with libraries to enable them to lend books or other
materials electronically, including across borders?

YES – Please explainwith specific examples

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO

NO OPINION

If there are problems, how wouldtheybest be solved?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

The following two questions are relevant bothtothis point (n° 3)
and the previous one (n° 2).

[In particular if you are an institutional user:]What
differences do you see in the management of physical and online
collections, including providing access to your subscribers?
What problems have you encountered?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

[In particular if you are a right holder:]What difference do you
see between libraries’traditional activities such as on-premises
consultation or public lending and activities such as
off-premises (online, at a distance) consultation and
e-lending? What problems have you encountered?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Mass digitisation

11

France and Germany have already adopted legislation to back the
effects of the MoU.The French act (LOI n° 2012-287 du 1er mars
2012 relative à l'exploitation numérique des livres
indisponibles du xxe siècle) foresees collectivemanagement,
unless the author or publisher in question opposes such
management.The German act (Gesetz zur Nutzung verwaister und
vergriffener Werke und einer weiteren Änderung des
Urheberrechtsgesetzes vom 1.Oktober 2013) contains a legal
presumption of representation by a collectingsociety in
relation to works whose rightholdersare not members of the
collecting society.

.

[In particular if you are an institutional user,engaging or
wanting to engage in mass digitisation projects,a rightholder,a
collective management organisation:]Would itbe necessaryin your
country to enact legislationto ensure thattheresults of the
2011 MoU (i.e. the agreements concluded between libraries and
collecting societies) havea cross-border effect sothatout of
commerce workscan be accessedacross the EU?

YES – Please explainwhy and how it could best be achieved

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO OPINION

Would it be necessary to develop mechanisms, beyond those
already agreed for other types of content (e.g. for audio- or
audio-visual collections, broadcasters’ archives)?

 YES – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO OPINION

Teaching

.

(a)[In particular if youare an enduser/consumeror an
institutional user:]Have you experienced specific problems when
trying to use works orother subject-matter for illustration for
teaching, including across borders?

(b)[In particular if youare aright holder:]Have youexperienced
specificproblems resulting from the wayin which works or other
subject-matter are used for illustration for teaching,
including across borders?

YES–Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO

NO OPINION

If there are problems, how wouldtheybest be solved?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

What mechanisms exist in the market place to facilitate the use
of content for illustration for teaching purposes?How
successful are they?

[Open question]

If your view is that a legislative solution is needed, what
would be its main elements? Which activities of the beneficiary
institutions should be covered and under what conditions?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

If your view is thatadifferent solutionisneeded, what would it
be?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Research

Directive 2001/29/EC12

Article 5(3)a of Directive 2001/29.

enables Member States to choose whether to implement in their
national laws a limitation for the purpose of non-commercial
scientific research.Theopenformulation of this (optional)
provision allows forratherdifferent implementationsat Member
States level.

(a)[In particular if you arean enduser/consumeror an
institutional user:]Haveyou experienced specific problems when
trying to use works or other subject matter in thecontextof
research projects/activities, including across borders?

(b)[In particular if you area right holder:]Haveyouexperienced
specificproblems resulting from the wayin which works or other
subject-matter are usedin thecontextof research
projects/activities, including across borders?

YES–Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO

NO OPINION

If there are problems, how wouldtheybest be solved?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

What mechanisms exist in the Member States to facilitate the use
of content for research purposes?How successful are they?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Disabilities

(c)[In particular if you are a rightholder:]Have you experienced
specificproblems resulting fromthe application of limitations or
exceptions allowing for the distribution/communication of works
published in special formats, including across borders?

YES–Please explainby giving examples

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO

NO OPINION

Ifthere are problems, what could be done to improve
accessibility?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

What mechanisms exist in the market place to facilitate
accessibility to content? How successful are they?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Text and data mining

(a)[In particular if you are an enduser/consumeror an
institutional user:]Haveyou experiencedobstacles,linked to
copyright,when trying to usetext or data miningmethods,
including across borders?

(b)[In particular if you are aservice provider:]Have you
experienced obstacles, linked to copyright, when providing
services based on text or data mining methods, including across
borders?

(c)[In particular if you are a rightholder:]Have you experienced
specificproblems resulting fromthe use of text and data mining
in relation to copyright protected content, including across
borders?

YES–Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO–Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO OPINION

If there are problems, how wouldtheybest be solved?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

If your view is that a legislative solution is needed, what
would be its main elements? Which activities should be covered
and under what conditions?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

If your view is thatadifferent solutionisneeded, what would it
be?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Are there other issues, unrelated to copyright, that constitute
barriers to the use of text or data mining methods?

[Open question]……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

User-generated content

(c)[In particular if you are a right holder:]Have you
experienced problems resulting from the way the users are using
pre-existing works or other subject-matter to disseminate new
content on the Internet, including across borders?

 YES – Please explain by giving examples

Kommerzielle Portale erzielen Einnahmen aus UGC, der von Dritten
eingestellt wird und der geschützte Werke enthält. Sie
beteiligen die Rechteinhaber nicht an diesen Einnahmen – z.B.
Youtube. Teilweise erhalten User mit besonders erfolgreichem
Content einen Anteil der Erträge aus den Einnahmen der
kommerziellen Portale, ohne dass die Autoren der Werke, die in
diesem UGC verwendet wurden, daran beteiligt
werden.……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO

NO OPINION

(a)[In particular if you are an end user/consumer or aright
holder:]Have you experienced problems when trying to ensure
that the work you have created (on the basis of pre-existing
works) is properly identified for online use?Are proprietary
systems sufficient in this context?

(b)[In particular if you are a service provider:]Do you provide
possibilities for users that are publishing/disseminating the
works they have created (on the basis of pre-existing works)
through your service to properly identify these works for
online use?

 YES – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO OPINION

(a)[In particular if you are an enduser/consumeror aright
holder):]Have you experienced problems when trying to be
remunerated for the use of the work you have created (on the
basis of pre-existing works)?

(b)[In particular if you are a service provider:]Do you provide
remuneration schemes for users publishing/disseminating the
works they have created (on the basis of pre-existing works)
through your service?

 YES – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO OPINION

If there are problems, how would they best be solved?

[Open question]

Bei UGC (User Generated Content) geht es faktisch nicht um
private Nutzungen, sondern um urheberrechtlich relevante
Vorgänge (Vervielfältigung, öffentliche Zugänglichmachung
etc.), da der Content ins Netz gestellt wird und weltweit
abrufbar ist. Das gilt erst recht, wenn kommerzielle Zwecke
verfolgt werden. Betroffen sind deshalb all diejenigen, die die
Werke den Endverbrauchern wahrnehmbar machen oder daran
mitwirken, insbesondere Plattformbetreiber; denn selbst wenn
die Dienste solcher Plattformen von Privatleuten genutzt
werden, agieren doch die Plattformbetreiber durchweg
kommerziell. Sie sollten sich die erforderlichen Rechte von den
Verwertungsgesellschaften und den sonstigen Rechtsinhabern
beschaffen müssen, wenn es die nicht kommerziell handelnden
Nutzer dieser Plattformen nicht tun (und das Geschäftsmodell
der Plattformbetreiber auch gar nicht vorsieht, dass die Nutzer
es tun).

Außerdem sollte unter dem Begriff UGC nicht gezählt werden, was
unter dessen Deckmantel einfach nur unverändert und ohne
Einwilligung der Rechtsinhaber genutzt wird. Werden fremde
Werke unverändert genutzt, müssen hierfür die einschlägigen
Nutzungsrechte erworben werden.

Grundsätzlich muss an eine Vergütungspflicht gedacht werden.

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

If your view is that a legislative solution is needed, what
would be its main elements? Which activities should be covered
and under what conditions?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

If your view is thatadifferent solutionisneeded, what would it
be?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Private copying and reprography

.

In your view, is there a need to clarify at the EU level the
scope and application of theprivate copyingand
reprographyexceptions13

Art. 5.2(a) and 5.2(b) of Directive 2001/29/EC.

in the digital environment?

YES–Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO–Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO OPINION

Should digital copies made by end users for private purposes in
the context of a service that has been licensed by
rightholders, and where theharmto the rightholder is minimal,
be subject to private copying levies?14

This issue was also addressed in the recommendations of Mr
Antonio Vitorino resulting from the mediation on private
copying and reprography levies

YES– Please explain

Gesetzliche Vergütungsansprüche wie die Privatkopie verbinden
Rechtssicherheit für Diensteanbieter und Verbraucher mit
geringen Transaktionskosten. Insofern ist die Privatkopie voll
kompatibel mit neuen digitalen Geschäftsmodellen.

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO OPINION

How would changes in levies with respect to the application
toonline services (e.g.services based oncloud computing
allowing, for instance, usersto have copieson different
devices)impactthe development and functioning ofnewbusiness
modelson the one hand and rightholders’ revenue on the other?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Would you see an added value in making levies visibleon the
invoices for products subject to levies?15

This issue was also addressed in the recommendations of Mr
Antonio Vitorino resulting from the mediation on private
copying and reprography levies.

YES–Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO–Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO OPINION

Have you experienced a situation whereacross-border transaction
resulted inundue levy payments, or duplicate payments of the
same levy, or other obstacles to the free movement of goods or
services?

YES–Pleasespecify the type of transaction and indicate
thepercentageoftheundue payments. Please also indicatehow a
priori exemption and/orex post reimbursement schemes could help
to remedy the situation.

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO–Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO OPINION

What percentage of products subject to a levy is sold to persons
other than natural persons for purposes clearly unrelated to
private copying? Do any of those transactions result in undue
payments? Please explain in detail the example you provide
(type of products, type of transaction, stakeholders, etc.).

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Where such undue payments arise, what percentage of trade do
they affect? To what extent could a priori exemptionsand/orex
post reimbursement schemes existing in some Member States help
to remedy the situation?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Ifyou have identified specificproblemswith the current
functioning of the levy system, howwould these
problemsbestbesolved?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Fairremuneration of authors and performers

[In particular if you arean author/performer:] What is the best
mechanism (or combination of mechanisms) to ensure that you
receive an adequate remuneration for the exploitation of your
works and performances?

[Open question]

Die kollektive Rechtewahrnehmung durch nicht auf Gewinnerzielung
ausgerichtete Verwertungsgesellschaften ist der beste Garant
dafür, dass die Interessen von Urhebern in einem sich
entwickelnden europäischen Binnenmarkt für geistige
Eigentumsrechte angemessen vertreten werden und eine effiziente
Lizenzvergabe an Musiknutzer aller Art gewährleistet bleibt.

Angesichts der Nachfragemacht der großen, international
agierenden Musiknutzer im Online-Bereich sind
Verwertungsgesellschaften wichtiger denn je, um in
Verhandlungen mit Nutzern eine faire Vergütung für die Urheber
auszuhandeln.

Durch die treuhänderische Verwaltung der Urheber- und
Leistungsschutzrechte all ihrer eigenen Mitglieder und der
Mitglieder der von ihnen vertretenen ausländischen
Verwertungsgesellschaften nehmen Verwertungsgesellschaften
sowohl international gefragtes als auch Nischenrepertoire zu
gleichen Bedingungen wahr. Auf diese Weise ermöglichen sie
gerade weniger bekannten Autoren einen gleichberechtigten
Marktzugang und leisten einen wichtigen Beitrag zur kulturellen
Vielfalt.

Soweit Werke im Rahmen gesetzlicher Schranken genutzt werden,
sollten in der Regel gesetzliche Vergütungsansprüche vorgesehen
sein, die nur über Verwertungsgesellschaften kassiert und an die
Urheber und Rechtsinhaber verteilt werden dürfen. Letzteres ist
erforderlich, damit den Urhebern diese Beteiligung nicht auf
vertraglichem Wege abbedungen werden kann.

Is there a need to act at the EU level (for instance to prohibit
certain clauses in contracts)?

YES–Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO–Please explainwhy

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO OPINION

Ifyou consider that the current rules are not effective, what
would you suggest to addresstheshortcomingsyou identify?

[Open question]

Die Regelungen zu den Vergütungsansprüchen von Autoren und die
Regelungen zu Nutzungsentgelten müssen kompatibel sein. Autoren
müssen eine Mindestvergütung pro Nutzung erhalten, aber das ist
nur möglich, wenn auch die Nutzer eine Mindestvergütung pro
Nutzung zahlen. Das bedeutet, dass auch dann, wenn
Provider(oder andere Anbieter) Endverbrauchern das Recht zu
einer unbegrenzten Anzahl an Nutzungen zu einem festen Preis
anbieten („Flatrate“), die Abrechnung an die Rechteinhaber nach
der tatsächlichen Nutzung erfolgen muss, verbunden mit einer
Mindestvergütung pro tatsächlicher Nutzung.

Respectforrights

Shouldthe civil enforcement system in the EU be rendered more
efficient for infringements of copyright committed with a
commercial purpose?

YES – Please explain

Verbesserungen bei der Rechtsdurchsetzung von Urheberrechten
müssen auf der Ebene der kommerziellen Plattformbetreiber
ansetzen. Es darf insbesondere keine Haftungsprivilegierung für
Host-Provider geben, die an der Verwertung kreativer Inhalte
wirtschaftlich partizipieren.

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO–Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO OPINION

In particular,isthe current legal framework clear enough to
allow forsufficient involvement of intermediaries (such as
Internet service providers, advertising brokers, payment
service providers, domain name registrars, etc.) in inhibiting
online copyright infringements with a commercial purpose? If
not, whatmeasureswould be useful to foster the cooperation of
intermediaries?

[Open question]

Für Urheberrechtsverletzungen verantwortlich sind nicht nur
Personen, die unmittelbar Befugnisse des Urhebers missachten.
Auch Internet Service Provider, Betreiber von Suchmaschinen,
sozialen Netzwerken oder „Cloud“-Diensten sowie Werbewirtschaft
und Finanzdienstleister trifft aus unserer Sicht eine
Verkehrssicherungspflicht zum Schutz des Urheberrechts im
Internet, weil sie aufgrund ihrer Marktstellung Gefahrenquellen
für Rechtsverletzungen schaffen und z.B. durch das Angebot an
den Nutzer anonym oder pseudonym agieren zu können,
Rechtsverletzungen Vorschub leisten. Grundsätzlich sollte eine
Verkehrssicherungspflicht für alle genannten
Internetdienstleister gesetzlich festgeschrieben werden.
Üblicherweise werden illegale Angebote über Host-Provider
öffentlich zugänglich gemacht, die dem Uploader als Anbieter
des Inhalts Anonymität gewährleisten und somit
Urheberrechtsverletzungen nicht nur erleichtern, sondern oft
ihr gesamtes Geschäftsmodell auf der Zugänglichmachung
unlizenzierter urheberrechtlich geschützter Inhalte aufbauen.
Hier sollte bezogen auf die Haftung ein Ausgleich zwischen dem
Verhältnis zwischen Anonymität und Verantwortung stattfinden:
Gewährleistet der Host-Provider dem Anbieter von
rechtsverletzenden Inhalten Anonymität (oder Pseudoanonymität),
dann ist er nicht nur verkehrssicherungspflichtig, sondern auch
für das verantwortlich, was unter dem Schirm der von ihm
bereitgestellten Anonymität geschieht. In Fällen wie diesen
sollte über eine Verschärfung der Haftung durch
Schadensersatzpflichtnachgedacht werden, die der Hostprovider
nur vermeiden kann, wenn er die Identität des Uploaders
preisgibt.

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Does the current civil enforcement framework ensure that the
right balance is achieved between the right to have one’s
copyright respected and other rights such as the
protectionofprivate life and protection of personal data?

YES–Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO – Please explain

Datenschutz und der Respekt der Privatsphäre sind hohe Güter.
Dennoch kann es im Internet nicht Anonymität um jeden Preis
geben, vor allem nicht um illegale Aktivitäten zu verdecken,
vgl. Frage 76. Zivilrechtliche Instrumente wie die in der
Enforcement-Richtlinie vorgesehenen sind nötig, damit
Rechteinhaber eine Chance haben, gegen die illegale Nutzung
ihrer Werke vorzugehen. Die notwendigen Maßnahmen können dabei
regelmäßig auch so gestaltet werden, dass auf
datenschutzrechtliche Belange ausreichend Rücksicht genommen
wird.

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO OPINION

A single EU Copyright Title

Should the EU pursue the establishment of a single EU Copyright
Title, as a means of establishing a consistent framework for
rights and exceptions to copyright across the EU, as well as a
single framework for enforcement?

YES

NO

NO OPINION

Should this be the next step in the development of copyright in
the EU? Does the current level of difference among the Member
State legislation mean that this is a longer term project?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Other issues

Are there any other important matters related to the EU legal
framework forcopyright?Pleaseexplainandindicatehow such matters
should be addressed.

[Open question]

Bisher fallen unter die urheberrechtlichen Verwertungsrechte nur
die dem eigentlichen Werkgenuss vorgelagerten Nutzungshandlungen
(Vervielfältigung, Verbreitung, Sendung etc.). Der Genuss der
Werke ist die eigentliche Nutzungshandlung, deretwegen die ihr
vorgelagerten Nutzungshandlungen (Vervielfältigung, Verbreitung
etc.) unternommen werden und für die der Endverbraucher
letztlich auch bezahlen muss. Wenn durch neue digitale
Möglichkeiten die vorgelagerten Nutzungshandlungen entfallen
oder ersetzt werden durch andere Handlungen, die nicht dem
Urheberrecht unterliegen, dann ist der Werkgenuss - ggfs. gegen
Entgelt - möglich, ohne dass dafür Vergütungen an die Urheber
geleistet werden, so dass die faire Beteiligung der Urheber
nicht mehr gewährleistet wäre. Es wäre daher sinnvoll, den
Werkgenuss (die Wahrnehmung der Werke) genauso in die
Nutzungsrechte einzubeziehen wie die Wahrnehmbarmachung der
Werke.

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

