


Public Consultation

on the review of the EU copyright rules

Please identify yourself:

Name:

Françoise GOETHALS,De Boeck Education,Directrice éditoriale,15
employés,environ5 000 000 € CA annuel

DBE est membre de l’Association desEditeursBelges (ADEB)dont je
soutiens la position dans ce dossier.

Type of respondent(Pleaseunderlinethe appropriate):

Publisher/Producer/Broadcaster

Other(Please explain):

Access to your content across Europe

Why is it not possible to accessmanyonline content servicesfrom
anywhere in Europe?1.[In particular if you arean
enduser/consumer:]Have you faced problems whentryingto access
online services in an EU Member State other than the one in
which you live?

YES - Please provide examples indicating the Member State,
the sector and the type of content concerned (e.g. premium
content such as certain films and TV series, audio-visual
content in general, music, e-books, magazines, journals and
newspapers, games, applications and other software)

NO

NO OPINION

3.[In particular if you area right holder or acollective
management organisation:]Howoftenare youaskedtogrant
multi-territorial licences?Pleaseindicate, if possible,
thenumber of requests per yearand provide examples indicating
the Member State, the sector and the type of content concerned.


[Open question]

J’octroie presque toujours des licences multi-territoriales,
c’est la règle dans le secteur de l’édition du livre.

5.[In particular if you area right holder or acollective
management organisation:]Are there reasons why, evenin cases
where you holdall thenecessaryrights forall theterritoriesin
question,youwould still find it necessaryor justifiedto impose
territorial restrictions onaservice provider (in order, for
instance, to ensure that access to certain content is not
possible in certainEuropeancountries)?

YES – Please explain by giving examples

NO

Je nepense pasrestreindrel’accès aux ebooks que je publie.

NO OPINION

7.Do you think that further measures (legislative or
non-legislative, including market-led solutions) are needed at
EU level to increase the cross-border availability of content
services in the Single Market, while ensuring an adequate level
ofprotection for right holders?

YES – Please explain

NO– Please explain

Cela n’est pas nécessaire pour le secteur de l’édition du livre.

NO OPINION

8.Isthe scope of the“making available”right in cross-border
situations – i.e. when content is disseminated across borders
–sufficiently clear?

YES

NO–Pleaseexplain how this could be clarified and what
typeofclarification would be required(e.g.as in "targeting"
approach explained above,as in "country of origin"approach1

The objective of implementing a “country of origin”approachis to
localise the copyright relevant act that must be licenced in a
single Member State (the "country of origin", which could be
for example the Member State in whichthe content is uploaded or
wherethe service provider is established), regardless of in how
many Member States the work canbe accessed or received. Such an
approachhas already been introduced at EU level with regard to
broadcasting by satellite(seeDirective 93/83/EEC on the
coordination of certain rules concerning copyright and rights
related to copyright applicable to satellite broadcasting and
cable retransmission).

)

NO OPINION

9.[In particular if you are a right holder:]Coulda clarification
of the territorial scope of the“making available”right have
aneffect on therecognition of yourrights (e.g.whetheryou are
considered to be an author or not,whetheryou are considered to
have transferred your rights or not),onyourremuneration,
oronthe enforcement of rights(including the availability of
injunctive relief2

Injunctive relief is a temporary or permanent remedy allowing
the right holder to stop or prevent an infringement of his/her
right.

)?

YES –Please explain howsuchpotential effectscould beaddressed

NO

NO OPINION

10.[In particular if youa service provider or a right
holder:]Does the application of two rights toa single act of
economic exploitation in the online environment (e.g. a
download)create problemsfor you?

YES – Please explainwhat type of measureswould be needed in
order to address such problems (e.g. facilitation of joint
licences when the rights are in different hands,legislation to
achieve the "bundling of rights")

 NO

NO OPINION

4.Download to own digital content

14.[In particular if you area right holderor a service
provider:] What would betheconsequencesofproviding a legal
framework enabling the resale ofpreviouslypurchaseddigital
content? Please specify per market(type of content)concerned.

[Open question]

Nous ne pouvons concevoir que des e-books puissent être revendus
et loués grâce àune exception sans conséquences dramatiques pour
notre marché. Il y a de bonnes raisonspourque la vente en
seconde main ne soit permise que pour les exemplaires
physiquesqui eux s’usent avec le temps. Ce n’est pas le cas des
e-books dont la qualité ne s’altère jamais. Permettre un marché
de seconde main des e-books aurait des conséquences
désastreuses pour les éditeurs et les lecteurs.

Limitations and exceptions in the Single Market

21.Are there problems arising from the fact that most
limitations and exceptions provided in the
EUcopyrightdirectivesare optionalfor the Member States?

YES – Please explain by referring to specific cases

NO – Please explain

Nous n’y voyons aucun problème puisque la plupart des exceptions
importantes au bénéfice de l’enseignement, de la recherche, des
bibliothèques ou des personnesaffectées d’un handicapsont en
place dans toutes les législations à travers l’Europe.

NO OPINION

22.Should some/all of the exceptions be made mandatory and, if
so, is there aneed for a higher level of harmonisation of such
exceptions?

YES–Please explain byreferringto specific cases

NO – Please explain

Cela ne serait pas compatible avec le respect des traditions
nationales et culturelles qui font partie intégrante de nos
législationsen matière de droit d’auteur.

NO OPINION

24.Independently from the questions above, is there a need to
provide for agreaterdegree of flexibility in the EU regulatory
framework for limitations and exceptions?

YES – Please explain why

NO – Please explain why

Le libellé actuel est assez flexible.

NO OPINION

26.Does the territoriality of limitations and exceptions, in
your experience,constitute a problem?

YES–Please explain why andspecify which exceptions you are
referring to

NO – Please explain why and specify which exceptions you are
referring to

En tant que maison d’édition, nousnous appuyonssur des
exceptions telles que celle de citation. Puis, nous vendons des
livres en Europe et dans le reste du monde.Nousn’avons jamais
rencontré de problèmes.

NO OPINION

27.In the event that limitationsand exceptionsestablished at
national level were to have cross-border effect, howshouldthe
question of “fair compensation” be addressed, whensuch
compensation is part of the exception?(e.g. who pays whom,
where?)

[Open question]

Il est crucial que les exceptions soient rémunérées. Si des
utilisations sont faites au-delà des frontières, nous devons
décider quelle partie doit payer, car les usages
transfrontaliers ne doivent pas conduire à la disparition des
compensations qui sont dues aux auteurset aux éditeurs pour les
conséquencesqu’entraînel'exception sur l'exploitation
commerciale de leurs œuvres.

Access to content in libraries and archivesPreservationand
archiving

28.(b)[In particular if you arearightholder:]Have you
experienced problems with the use by libraries, educational
establishments, museum or archives of the preservation
exception?

YES – Please explain, by Member State, sector, and the type
of use in question.

NO

NO OPINION

Off-premises access to library collections

32.(c)[In particular if you are arightholder:]Have you
negotiated agreements with institutional users that enable
those institutions to provide remote access, including across
borders,to the works or other subject-matter in their
collections, for purposes of research and private study?

[Open question]

Nous n’avons pasencorenégocié ce genre d’accords car nos
livres/publicationsnumériquesne sont pasencore demandé(e)s par
ces institutions.

E –lending

36.(c)[In particular if you are aright holder:]Have you
negotiated agreements with libraries to enable them to lend
books or other materials electronically, including across
borders?

YES –Please explainwith specific examples

Nous n’avons pasencorenégocié ce genre d’accord.Dossier en cours
d’analyse à la Fédération Wallonie-Bruxelles (Prêt numérique).

NO

NO OPINION

Teaching

42.(b)[In particular if youarearight holder:]Have
youexperiencedspecificproblems resulting from the wayin
whichworks or other subject-matter are used for illustration
for teaching, including across borders?

YES–Please explain

NO

NO OPINION

44.What mechanisms exist in the market place to facilitate the
use of content for illustration for teaching purposes?How
successful are they?

[Open question]

Nos sociétés de gestion collective ont négocié des licences avec
les écoles/universités pour l’utilisation de notre contenu au
titre d’illustration de l’enseignement.

Les montants payés ne sont pas suffisamment élevés pour couvrir
le préjudice, et cela donne aux enseignants l’impression qu’ils
peuvent tout reproduire sans exception, mais globalement, cela
fonctionne…

Research

47.(b)[In particular if you area right
holder:]Haveyouexperiencedspecificproblemsresulting from the
wayin whichworks or other subject-matter are usedin
thecontextof research projects/activities, including across
borders?

YES–Please explain

NO

NO OPINION

49.What mechanisms exist in the Member States to facilitate the
use of content for research purposes?How successful are they?

Dans la mesure où je suis concernée, au niveau scolaire, des
sociétés de gestion collective ont négocié des licences avec
les écoles/universités pour l’utilisation de notre contenu dans
un but de recherche.

Disabilities

50.(c)[In particular if you are arightholder:]Have you
experiencedspecificproblems resulting fromthe application of
limitations or exceptions allowing for the
distribution/communication of works published in special
formats, including across borders?

YES–Please explainby giving examples

NO

NO OPINION

52.What mechanisms exist in the market place to facilitate
accessibility to content?How successful are they?

[Open question]

Grâce à ePub3, nous sommes maintenant capables de rendre
beaucoup plus d’e-books accessibles.Nous ne l’utilisons pas
encore car seuls certains constructeurs proposent des tablettes
qui acceptent ce format !

Text and data mining

53.(c)[In particular if you are a rightholder:]Have you
experiencedspecificproblems resulting fromthe useof textand
data mining in relation to copyright protected content,
including across borders?

YES–Please explain

NO – Please explain

À la demande de chercheursde bonne foi aux butsnon-commerciaux,
les éditeurs octroient déjà des autorisations pour TDM. Nous
accordons des licences à des conditions standard et sans frais
supplémentaires. Nous pouvons également autoriserdu TDM pour
des acteurs commerciaux mais des conditions de licence
s'appliquent alors.

NO OPINION

55.If your view is thatadifferent solutionisneeded, what would
it be?

[Open question]

En soutenant les initiatives de STM comme leCross Ref’s
Prospect.(http://www.crossref.org/).

57.Are there other issues, unrelated to copyright, that
constitute barriers to the use of text or data mining methods?

[Open question]

Mettre sur pied un environnement technique spécifique au TDM
peut être un challenge et une charge (comme une API permettant
au chercheur de télécharger le contenu avant de l'exploiter).
Une exception ne sera pasrelevantedans la gestion des questions
techniques.

User-generated content
======================

58.(c)[In particular if you are a right holder:]Have you
experiencedproblems resulting from the waythe usersare using
pre-existing works or other subject-matter to disseminate new
content on the Internet, including across borders?

YES – Please explain by giving examples

NO

NO OPINION

59.(a)[In particular if you are an end user/consumer or aright
holder:]Have you experienced problems when trying to ensure
that the work you have created (on the basis of pre-existing
works) is properly identified for online use?Are proprietary
systems sufficient in this context?

YES – Please explain

NO– Please explain

Nos ouvrages bénéficient de l'ISBN. Lorsque nous créons
uneœuvrebasée sur une œuvre préexistante, soit nous nous
appuyons sur l’exception de citation ou de parodieou nous
demandons les droits nécessaires auprès des titulaires de
droits d'origine. Nous avons toujours procédé de cettefaçon et
ne croyonspasqu’unchangement dans la législation
soitnécessaire.

NO OPINION

Fairremuneration of authors and performers

73.Istherea need to actat theEU level (for instance to prohibit
certain clauses in contracts)?

YES–Please explain

 NO – Please explain why

Il y a déjà de bonnes dispositions en place garantissant que les
contrats sont équilibrés et non abusifs. Le droit des contrats
est une compétence nationale et nous ne voyons aucun besoin de
créer un droit contractuel EU couvrant les contrats en matière
de droit d’auteur.

NO OPINION

Respectforrights

75.Shouldthe civil enforcement system in the EU be rendered more
efficient for infringements of copyright committed with a
commercial purpose?

YES– Please explain

Nous sommesgénéralement satisfaits de lalégislation
actuelle,mais il y atoujoursplace àdel'amélioration.

Les éditeurs pourraientbénéficier d'une"présomption de
propriété"sur la base dela cessiondes droitspar leurs
auteurs.Cela les aiderait àavoir un "locus standi"pour être en
mesurede prendre des mesureslégalescontre les
contrefacteurs.Nous ne sommes pasen faveurd'une actioncontre
les personnes,mais noussoutenons le ciblagedes sites illégaux.

Ces sitesqui enfreignentle droit d'auteurpeuvent
sembler"non-commerciaux",mais il y afréquemmentdes signesqui
démontrent que ceux-ci engrangent unequantité considérable
d'argent(par exemplevia la publicité).

NO–Please explain

NO OPINION

76.In particular,isthe current legal framework clear enough to
allow for sufficient involvement of intermediaries (such as
Internet service providers, advertising brokers, payment
service providers, domain name registrars, etc.) in inhibiting
online copyright infringements with a commercial purpose? If
not, whatmeasureswould be useful to foster the cooperation of
intermediaries?

[Open question]

Nous trouverionscelautilesicertains intermédiairestels queles
annonceurs, lesservices de paiement,les bureaux
d'enregistrementde noms de domaineet les moteurs derecherchequi
bénéficient desitespirateset de la piraterieen
généralétaientencouragés à coopérerdavantage dansles efforts
visant àmettre fin aux activitésillégales.

77.Does the current civil enforcement framework ensure that the
right balance is achieved between the right to have one’s
copyright respected and other rights such as the
protectionofprivate life and protection of personal data?

YES–Please explain

NO–Please explain

Ces deux droits importants doivent être respectés, mais il ne
faudrait pas que l’un prenne le pas sur l'autre, et nous
n'acceptons pas le droit de rester anonyme lors de la
perpétration d'une infraction.

NO OPINION

