


Public Consultation

on the review of the EU copyright rules

Contents

I.  Introduction  2

A.  Context of the consultation  2

B.  How to submit replies to this questionnaire  3

C.  Confidentiality  3

II.  Rights and the functioning of the Single Market  7

A.  Why is it not possible to access many online content
services from anywhere in Europe?  7

B.  Is there a need for more clarity as regards the scope of
what needs to be authorised (or not) in digital transmissions?
10

1.  The act of “making available”  10

2.  Two rights involved in a single act of exploitation  11

3.  Linking and browsing  12

4.  Download to own digital content  13

C.  Registration of works and other subject matter – is it a
good idea?  14

D.  How to improve the use and interoperability of identifiers
15

E.  Term of protection – is it appropriate?  15

III.  Limitations and exceptions in the Single Market  16

A.  Access to content in libraries and archives  19

1.  Preservation and archiving  19

2.  Off-premises access to library collections  20

3.  E – lending  21

4.  Mass digitisation  22

B.  Teaching  23

C.  Research  25

D.  Disabilities  25

E.  Text and data mining  27

F.  User-generated content  28

IV.  Private copying and reprography  31

V.  Fair remuneration of authors and performers  33

VI.  Respect for rights  34

VII.  A single EU Copyright Title  36

VIII.  Other issues  36

Introduction

Context of the consultation

Over the last two decades, digital technology and the Internet
have reshaped the ways in which content is created,
distributed, and accessed. New opportunities have materialised
for those that create and produce content (e.g. a film, a
novel, a song),for new and existingdistribution platforms,for
institutions such as libraries, for activities such as research
and for citizens who now expect to be able to access content –
for information, education or entertainment purposes –
regardless of geographical borders.

This new environment also presents challenges.One of themis for
the market to continue to adapt to new forms of distribution
and use.Another oneis for the legislator to ensure that the
system of rights, limitations to rights and enforcement remains
appropriate and is adapted to the new environment. This
consultation focuses on the second of these challenges:
ensuring that the EU copyright regulatory frameworkstays fit
for purpose in the digital environmentto support creation and
innovation, tap the full potential of the Single
Market,fostergrowth andinvestment in our economy
andpromotecultural diversity.

In its"Communication on Content in the Digital Single Market"the
Commission set out two parallel tracks of action:ontheone hand,
to complete its on-going effort to review and to modernise the
EU copyright legislative frameworkwith a view to a decision in
2014 on whether to table legislative reform proposals, andon
the other, to facilitate practical industry-led solutions
through the stakeholder dialogue"Licences for Europe"on issues
on which rapid progress was deemed necessary and possible.

The"Licences for Europe"process has been finalised now. The
Commission welcomes the practical solutions stakeholders have
put forward in thiscontext and will monitor their progress.
Pledges have been made by stakeholders in all four Working
Groups (cross border portability of services, user-generated
content,audiovisual andfilm heritage and text and data mining).
Taken together, the Commission expects these pledgesto bea
further step in making the user environment easier in many
different situations. The Commission also takes note of the
fact that two groups –user-generated content andtext and data
mining–did not reach consensus among participating stakeholders
on either the problems to be addressed or on the results.
Thediscussions andresults of"Licences for Europe"will be also
taken into account in the context of the review of the
legislative framework.

As part of thereview process, the Commission is now launching a
public consultation onissuesidentified in the Communication on
Content in the Digital Single Market, i.e.:"territoriality in
the Internal Market, harmonisation, limitations and exceptions
to copyright in the digital age; fragmentation of the EU
copyright market; and how to improve the effectiveness and
efficiency of enforcement while underpinning its legitimacy in
the wider context of copyright reform". As highlighted in the
October 2013 European Council Conclusions"Providingdigital
services and content across the single market requires the
establishment of a copyright regime for the digital age. The
Commission will therefore complete its on-going review of the
EU copyright framework in spring 2014. It is important to
modernise Europe's copyright regime and facilitate licensing,
while ensuring a high level protection of intellectual property
rights and taking into account cultural diversity".

This consultation builds on previous consultations and public
hearings, in particular those on the"Green Paper on copyright
in the knowledge economy", the"Green Paper on the
onlinedistribution of audiovisual works"and"Content Online".
These consultations provided valuable feedback from
stakeholders on a number of questions,on issues as diverse as
the territoriality of copyright and possible ways to overcome
territoriality, exceptions related to the online dissemination
of knowledge, and rightholders’ remuneration, particularly in
the audiovisual sector. Views were expressed by stakeholders
representing all stages in the value chain, including right
holders, distributors, consumers, and academics. The questions
elicited widely diverging views on the best way to proceed. The
"Green Paper on Copyright in the Knowledge Economy" was followed
up by a Communication. The replies to the "Green Paper on the
online distribution of audiovisual works" have fed into
subsequent discussions on the Collective Rights Management
Directive and into the current review process.

How to submit replies to this questionnaire

You are kindly asked to send your repliesby5February 2014inaMS
Word, PDForOpenDocumentformattothefollowinge-mail address of DG
Internal Market and
Services:markt-copyright-consultation@ec.europa.eu. Please note
that replies sentafterthat date will not be taken into account.

This consultation is addressed to different categories of
stakeholders. To the extent possible, the questions indicate
the category/ies of respondents most likely to be concerned by
them (annotation in brackets, before the actual question).
Respondents should nevertheless feel free to reply to any/all
of the questions. Also, please note that, apart from the
question concerning the identification of the respondent, none
of the questions is obligatory. Replies containing answers only
to part of the questions will be also accepted.

You are requested toprovideyour answers directlywithin
thisconsultation document. For the“Yes/No/No
opinion”questionsplease put the selected answer
inboldandunderlineit so it is easy for us to see your
selection.

In your answers to the questions, you are invited to refer to
the situation in EUMember States.You are also invited in
particular to indicate, where relevant, what would be the
impact of options you put forward in terms of costs,
opportunities and revenues.

The public consultation is available in English.
Responsesmay,however,be sent in any of the 24officiallanguages
of the EU.

Confidentiality

The contributions received in this round of consultation as well
as asummary reportpresenting theresponsesin a statistical and
aggregated formwill be published on the website of DG MARKT.

Please note that all contributions received will be published
together with the identity of the contributor, unless the
contributor objects to the publication of their personal data
on the grounds that such publication would harm his or her
legitimate interests. In this case, the contribution will be
published in anonymous form upon the contributor's explicit
request. Otherwise the contribution will not be published nor
will its content be reflected in the summary report.

Pleaseread ourPrivacy statement.

Please identify yourself:

Name:

MASQ

In the interests of transparency, organisations (including, for
example, NGOs, trade associations and commercial enterprises)
are invited to provide the public with relevant information
about themselves by registering in the Interest Representative
Register and subscribing to its Code of Conduct.

If you are a Registered organisation, please indicate your
Register ID number below. Your contribution will then be
considered as representing the views of your organisation.

If your organisation is not registered, you have the opportunity
toregister now.Responses from organisations not registered will
be published separately.

If you would like to submit your reply on an anonymous basis
please indicate it belowby underlining the following answer:

Yes, I would like to submit my reply on an anonymous basis

Type of respondent(Pleaseunderlinethe appropriate):

End user/consumer(e.g.internet user,reader, subscriber to
musicor audiovisualservice, researcher,student)ORRepresentative
of end users/consumers

for the purposes of this questionnaire normally referred to
in questions as"end users/consumers"

Institutional user(e.g. school,university, research centre,
library, archive)ORRepresentative of institutional users

for the purposes of this questionnaire normally referred to
in questions as"institutional users"

Author/Performer OR Representative of authors/performers

Publisher/Producer/BroadcasterOR Representative of
publishers/producers/broadcasters

the two above categoriesare,for the purposes of this
questionnaire, normally referred to in questions as"right
holders"

Intermediary/Distributor/Other service provider(e.g. online
music or audiovisual service, games platform,social media,
search engine, ICT industry)OR Representative of
intermediaries/distributors/other service providers

for the purposes of this questionnaire normally referred to
in questionsas"service providers"

Collective Management Organisation

Public authority

Member State

Other(Please explain):

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Rights and the functioning of the Single Market

Why is it not possible to accessmany online content servicesfrom
anywhere in Europe?[The territorial scope of the rights involved
in digital transmissions and the segmentation of the market
through licensing agreements]

Holders of copyright and related rights – e.g. writers, singers,
musicians - do not enjoy a single protection in the EU. Instead,
they are protected on the basis of a bundle of national rights
in each Member State. Those rights have been largely harmonised
by the existing EU Directives. However, differences remain and
the geographical scope of the rights is limited to the
territory of the Member State granting them.Copyright is thus
territorial in the sense that rights are acquired and enforced
on a country-by-country basis under national law.

The dissemination of copyright-protected content on the Internet
– e.g. by a music streaming service, or by an online e-book
seller – therefore requires, in principle, an authorisation for
each national territory in which the content is communicated to
the public. Rightholders are, of course, in a position to grant
a multi-territorial or pan-European licence, such that content
services can be provided in several Member States and across
borders.A number of stepshave beentaken at EU level to
facilitate multi-territoriallicences: the proposal for a
Directive on Collective Rights Management should significantly
facilitate the delivery of multi-territorial licences in
musical worksfor online services;the structured stakeholder
dialogue “Licences for Europe”and market-led developments such
as the on-going work in the Linked Content Coalition.

"Licences for Europe" addressed in particular the specific issue
of cross-border portability, i.e. the ability of consumers
having subscribed to online services in their Member State to
keep accessing them when travelling temporarily to other Member
States. As a result, representatives of the audio-visual sector
issued a joint statement affirming their commitment to continue
working towards the further development of cross-border
portability.

Despite progress, there are continued problems with the
cross-border provision of, and access to, services. These
problems are most obvious to consumers wanting to access
services that are made available in Member States other than
the one in which they live. Not all online services are
available in all Member States and consumers face problems when
trying to access such services across borders. In some
instances, even if the “same” service is available in all
Member States, consumers cannot access the service across
borders (they can only access their “national” service, and if
they try to access the "same" service in another Member State
they are redirected to the one designated for their country of
residence).

This situation may in part stem from the territoriality of
rights and difficulties associated with the clearing of rights
in different territories. Contractual clauses in licensing
agreements between right holders and distributors and/or
between distributors and end users may also be at the origin of
some of the problems (denial of access, redirection).

The main issue at stake here is, therefore, whether further
measures (legislative or non-legislative, including market-led
solutions) need to be taken at EU level in the medium term to
increase the cross-border availability of content services in
the Single Market, while ensuring an adequate level of
protection for right holders.

[In particular if you are an end user/consumer:]Have you faced
problems whentryingto access online services in an EU Member
State other than the one in which you live?

YES - Please provide examples indicating the Member State,
the sector and the type of content concerned (e.g. premium
content such as certain films and TV series, audio-visual
content in general, music, e-books, magazines, journals and
newspapers, games, applications and other software)

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO

NO OPINION

[In particular if you area service provider:]Have you faced
problems when seeking to provide online services across
bordersin the EU?

YES - Please explain whether such problems, in your
experience, are related to copyright or to other issues (e.g.
business decisions relating to the cost of providing services
across borders, compliance with other laws such as consumer
protection)? Please provide examples indicating the Member
State, the sector and the type of content concerned (e.g.
premium content such as certain films and TV series,
audio-visual content in general, music, e-books, magazines,
journals and newspapers, games, applications and other
software).

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO

NO OPINION

[In particular if you area right holder or acollective
management organisation:]Howoftenare youaskedtogrant
multi-territorial licences?Pleaseindicate, if possible, the
number of requests per yearand provide examples indicating the
Member State, the sector and the type of content concerned.

[Open question]

S’agissant de l’exploitation sonore des œuvres confiées en
gestion collective à la SACEM,cette dernière accorde des
licences d’exploitation quotidiennement. Nous laissons le soin
àla SACEM d’expliquer l’ampleur de son travail dans sa propre
contribution.

S’agissant des exploitations graphiques des œuvres musicales
relevant de la gestion individuelle par les éditeurs de
musique, deux situations doivent être distinguées : le
traitement des partitions et celui des paroles de chansons.

S’agissant des paroles de chansons, hors karaoké,la CSDEM
(Chambre Syndicale de l’Edition Musicale)a créé une base de
données de paroles de chansons appelée BOEM (Base d’Œuvres de
l’Edition Musicale). Cette base de données est alimentéepar
les éditeursqui y créent des fiches textes contenant, outre les
paroles des œuvres musicales, les métadonnées permettant leur
identification (titre, nom des auteurs, compositeurs et
éditeurs et leurs codes IPI, codes ISWC) et la mise en
relation avec d’autres sources tels que les enregistrements(nom
des artistes interprètes, codes ISRC). Les redevances provenant
des exploitations des œuvres sont versées à une société de
gestion collective spécialisée dans la musique graphique
appelée la SEAM (Société des Editeurs et Auteurs de Musique) à
laquelle les éditeurs de musique ont apporté volontairementpar
mandat en gestionleurs droits de représentation et de
reproduction numériques graphiques. Afin de permettre à la SEAM
de répartir les redevances revenant aux éditeurs, les clients de
BOEM fournissent à la SEAM chaque trimestre un relevé des
exploitations réalisées. En outre, les fiches textes
contiennent des informations relatives à la répartition des
droits entre chaque co-éditeur en cas de co-édition. Les
éditeurs perçoivent une fois par an les redevances leur
revenant pour l’exploitation de chacune de leurs œuvres. Les
éditeurs répartissent ensuite à leur auteurs et compositeurs
les redevances leur revenant au terme du contrat de cession et
d’édition encadrant leurs relations. La clé appliquée est la
clé dite « tiers », soit un partage à 50/50 entre l’éditeur de
musique et les auteurs et compositeurs. 

La SEAM gère actuellementdes licences avec7 clients et traite
entre 2 et 3 nouvelles demandes par an.

S’agissant des partitions et des paroles de chansons sous forme
de karaoké, les éditeurs de musique gèrent individuellement les
droits de représentation et de reproduction numériques
graphiques.

Concernant spécifiquement, les partitions,3 sites commerçants
principaux travaillent main dans la main avec les éditeurs de
musique pour la représentation et la reproduction de partitions
en ligne. Aussi, chaque année, des sites de moindre importance
demandent des autorisations d’exploitation, on peut en
dénombrer entre 2 et 3 par an là encore.

Enfin, s’agissant de l’exploitation de paroles de chansons sous
forme de karaoké, les éditeurs gèrent directement les demandes
d’exploitation. Un gros acteur local est le principal client
sur ce type d’utilisation des œuvres. Des demandes sont
également formulées par des exploitantsde taille moindre.

If you have identified problems inthe answers to any of the
questions above – what would be the best way to tackle them?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

[In particular if you area right holder or acollective
management organisation:]Are there reasons why, even in cases
where you hold all the necessary rights for all the territories
in question, you would still find it necessary or justified to
impose territorial restrictions on a service provider (in
order, for instance, to ensure that access to certain content
is not possible in certain European countries)?

YES–Please explain by giving examples

Il peut en effet parfois être nécessaire de restreindre
l’autorisation d’exploitation pour certains territoires.
Cette situation se rencontre lorsque le contrat encadrant les
relations entre les auteurs, les compositeurs et les éditeurs
de musique ne couvre pas ces territoires. Dans ce cas en effet,
l’éditeur ne peut pas autoriser une exploitation pour laquelle
il ne s’est pas fait céderles droits.Cependant, dans ce cas, le
service en ligne peut se tourner vers l’ayant droit qui pourra
lui apporter la licence pour le territoire pertinent.

Ces situations sont toutefois marginales.La principale raison
pour laquelle des restrictions territoriales peuvent parfois
empêcher les consommateurs d’accéder à un service de musique en
ligne dans d’autres pays d’Europe que leur pays d’origine, est
lié à la stratégie des services de musique en ligne
eux-mêmes.Ces services considèrent en effet que le marché
européen ne constitue un marché unique que sous l’aspect
réglementaire. De leur point de vue, leur service doit
s’adapter à un marché local afin d’être en phase avec les
besoins des consommateurs de ce marché. Cette situation réside
principalement dans la recherche d’un business model basé sur
la vente d’espaces publicitaires. Il leur faut s’adapter au
marché local pour vendre au mieux une publicité ciblée. C’est
tout l’enjeu desbusiness modelsqui se sont développés autour de
la diffusion de contenus culturels en ligne : l’adéquation de
l’offre avec la nécessité de vendre un maximum de volume
publicitaire. Ce d’autant que, plus le service en ligne est
capable de cibler des publics précis et identifiés, plus sa
régie publicitaire peut négocier des tarifs avantageux auprès
d’annonceurs en demande d’une orientation la plus fine possible
vers leur public-cible. En outre, une licence territorialement
restreinte est moins coûteuse en droits d’auteur. En résumé,
les outils pour accorder des licences existent, tout repose à
ce titre sur la stratégie des services de musique en ligne qui
préfèrent payer des redevances de droits d’auteur moindres pour
un/des territoire(s) limité(s), plutôt que créer un service sur
lequel valoriser l’ensemble de l’offre européenne et
internationale.Le droit d’auteur n’a rien à faire dans ce
débat, la véritable question est celle desbusiness modelsqui
tardent à se faire rentables.

On peut ajouter de ce point de vue également que des synergies
sont parfois recherchées avec des partenaires locaux tels que
les fournisseurs d’accès à internet(FAI)ce qui contraint les
services de musique en ligne à ciblerlesclients potentiels de
ces FAI et donc à développer une offre différente dans chaque
pays européen. Cela n’a rien à voir avec le fait d’avoir obtenu
une licence pan-européenne, ce qui est le cas pour des services
aussi importants, maisdécoule de la décision de ne
déclinercertains répertoires que dans certains pays.

Il est à noter que les licences seront prochainement amplifiées
par la transposition en droit français de la directive sur la
gestion collective des œuvres musicales et la consécration des
licences pan-européennes. Le texte de cette directive sera
encore débattu devant le Parlement européen le 4 février
prochain. Il nous semble plus que prématuré de venir fragiliser
un texte en réflexion devant la représentation européenne.

De plus, s’il est vrai que le droit d’auteur, comme tout domaine
juridique au demeurant, est technique, il n’en demeure pas moins
que les juristes dans ce domaine sont très bien formés, au moins
aussi bien que les spécialistes de la fiscalité.

Le principal obstacle du point de vue du développement de
l’offre légale demeure le piratage des œuvres. Les
utilisateurs de BOEM (cf. supra Q. 3) nous le répètent très
fréquemment. Il est très dommageable de ce point de vue que
les ayants droit soient aussi dépourvus de moyens dans leurs
démarches pour défendre leurs droits et ceux des auteurs et
compositeurs. De ce point de vue, les éditeurs et les créateurs
attendent beaucoup de la discussion autour d’une directive sur
le renforcement des moyens mis à la disposition des ayants
droit pour protéger leurs droits. Aussi, l’encadrement d’une
coopération des intermédiaires pourrait être positif.

Un autre obstacle réside dans l’absence d’harmonisation fiscale,
l’absence d’une TVA pour la distribution en ligne de biens
culturels (en tout cas dans le domaine musical), la lenteur de
la mise en place de dispositifs dans les domaines du
micro-paiement et des signaturesélectroniques sont autant de
problèmes bien plus significatifs dans la création d’un marché
unique des biens culturels en ligne.

NO

NO OPINION

[In particular if you aree.g. a broadcasteror a service
provider:]Are there reasons why, even in cases where you have
acquired all the necessary rights for all the territories in
question, you would still find it necessary or justified to
impose territorial restrictions on the service recipient (in
order for instance, to redirect the consumer to a different
website than the one he is trying to access)?

 YES – Please explain by giving examples

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO

 NO OPINION

Do you think that further measures (legislative or
non-legislative, including market-led solutions) are needed at
EU level to increase the cross-border availability of content
services in the Single Market, while ensuring an adequate level
ofprotection for right holders?

YES – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO– Please explain

Nous avons pu démontrer que nous ne rencontrons pas de
difficulté particulière pour accorder des licencespermettant
un accès partout dans le monde à un service en ligne quel que
soit son lieu d’émission. Les élémentsqu’il serait utile
d’étudier de ce point de vue sont ceux liés au renforcement
des droits (discussion en cours autour de la directive) et
l’harmonisation fiscale.

NO OPINION

Is there a need for more clarity as regards the scope of what
needs to be authorised (or not) in digital transmissions?[The
definition of the rights involved in digital transmissions]

The EU framework for the protection of copyright and related
rights in the digital environment is largely established by
Directive 2001/29/ECon the harmonisation of certain aspects of
copyright and related rights in the information society.
OtherEUdirectives in this field that are relevant in the online
environment are those relating to the protection of software and
databases.

Directive 2001/29/ECharmonisestherights of authors and
neighbouring rightholders which are essential for
thetransmission of digital copiesof works(e.g. an e-book)and
otherprotected subject matter(e.g. a record in a MP3
format)over the internet or similar digital networks.

The mostrelevantrightsfor digital transmissionsarethe
reproduction right, i.e. the right to authorise or prohibit the
making of copies,(notablyrelevant at the start of the
transmission –e.g. the uploading ofadigital copy of a work to
a serverin view ofmaking it available–and at the users’ end–
e.g. when a user downloads a digital copy of a work)and the
communication to the public/making available right, i.e. the
rights to authorise or prohibit the dissemination of the works
in digital networks.These rightsare intrinsically linked in
digital transmissionsandboth need to be cleared.

The act of “making available”

Directive 2001/29/EC specifiesneitherwhatis covered bythe making
available right(e.g. the upload,the accessibility by the
public,theactualreception by the public)norwherethe act of
“making available” takes place. This does not raise questions
if the act is limited to a single territory. Questions arise
however when the transmission covers several territories and
rights need to be cleared (does the act of "making available"
happen in the country of the upload only? in each of the
countries where the content is potentially accessible? in each
of the countries where thecontent is effectively accessed?).The
most recent case law of the Court of Justice of the European
Union (CJEU)suggests that a relevant criterion is
the“targeting” of a certainMember State'spublic. According
to this approachthecopyright-relevant act(which has to be
licensed) occurs at leastin those countries which are
“targeted” by the online service provider.A service
provider “targets” a group of customers residing in a specific
country when it directs its activity to that group, e.g. via
advertisement, promotions, a language or a currency
specifically targeted at that group.

Isthe scope of the“making available”right in cross-border
situations – i.e. when content is disseminated across borders
–sufficiently clear?

YES

NO–Pleaseexplain how this could be clarified and what
typeofclarification would be required(e.g.as in "targeting"
approach explained above,as in "country of origin"approach)

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO OPINION

[In particular if you are a right holder:]Could a clarification
of the territorial scope of the “making available” right have
an effect on the recognition of your rights (e.g. whether you
are considered to be an author or not, whether you are
considered to have transferred your rights or not),onyour
remuneration, oron the enforcement of rights (including the
availability of injunctive relief)?

YES – Please explain howsuchpotential effectscould
beaddressed

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO

NO OPINION

Two rights involved in a single act of exploitation

Each act of transmission in digital networks entails(in the
current state of technology and law) several reproductions.This
means that there are two rights that apply to digital
transmissions: the reproduction right and the making available
right. Thismay complicate the licensing of works for online
usenotably whenthetwo rights are held by different
persons/entities.

[In particular if youa service provider or a right holder:]Does
the application of two rights to a single act of economic
exploitation in the online environment (e.g. a download) create
problems for you?

YES – Please explainwhat type of measureswould be needed in
order to address such problems (e.g. facilitation of joint
licences when the rights are in different hands,legislation to
achieve the "bundling of rights")

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO

Dans 99% des cas, les deux droits font l’objet d’une seule et
même convention par souci de simplicitéet sont gérés par une
seule et même société de gestion collective (la SACEM en
France). C’était déjà le cas dans le monde physique et
analogique. Les ayants droit ont toujours cherché à simplifier
la conclusion de licences. Il en est de même dans le monde
numérique.

NO OPINION

Linking and browsing

Hyperlinks are references to data that lead a user from one
location in the Internet to another. They are indispensable for
the functioning of the Internet as a network. Several cases are
pending before the CJEU in which the question has been raised
whether the provision of a clickable link constitutes an act of
communication to the public/making available to the public
subject to the authorisation of the rightholder.

A user browsing the internet (e.g. viewing a web-page) regularly
creates temporary copies of works and other subject-matter
protected under copyright on the screen and in the 'cache'
memory of his computer. A question has been referred to the
CJEU as to whether such copies are always covered by the
mandatory exception for temporary acts of reproduction provided
for in Article 5(1) of Directive 2001/29/EC.

Should the provision of a hyperlink leading to a work or other
subject matter protected under copyright,either in generalor
under specific circumstances,besubject to the authorisation of
the rightholder?

YES– Please explain whether you consider this to be the case
in general, or under specificcircumstances, and why

De manière générale car il s’agit de la mise à disposition d’une
reproduction de l’œuvre. Les technologies permettent par les
liens hypertextes de rendre indirectement une œuvredisponible
pour le public. Cette reproduction indirecte de l’œuvre doit
être appréhendée par le droit d’auteur dans la mesure où elle
produit les mêmes effets économiques qu’une reproduction
directe.Si le lien renvoie vers une source qui a obtenu une
licence, la licence s’applique d’elle-même dès le moment où
l’internaute arrive sur le site légal, les ayants droit sont
rémunérés. Si le lien renvoie vers une source illégale,
l’internaute aura ainsi obtenu le moyen d’accéder à l’œuvre
sans rémunération pour les ayants droit.Aucune licence ne peut
être invoquée.

 NO – Please explainwhether you consider this to be the case
in general,or under specific circumstances, and why(e.g.
because it does not amount to an act of communication to the
public – or to a new public, or because it should be covered by
a copyright exception)

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO OPINION

Should the viewing of a web-page where this implies the
temporary reproduction of a work or other subject matter
protected under copyright on the screen and in the cache memory
of the user’s computer, either in general or under specific
circumstances, be subject to the authorisation of the
rightholder?

YES– Please explain whether you consider this to be the case
in general, or under specific circumstances, and why

En droit français, les reproductions temporaires sur écran ou
dans la mémoire cache de l’ordinateur sont déjà soumises à une
exception(seule exception obligatoire de la Directive
2001/29)et ce, dans la mesure où ces types de reproduction ne
présentent pas un impact économique significatif. Si un impact
économique devait être constaté, ces reproductions devraient
être soumises à autorisation.

NO – Please explainwhether you consider this to be the case in
general,or under specific circumstances, andwhy(e.g. because it
isor should be covered by a copyright exception)

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO OPINION

Download to own digital content

Digital content is increasinglybeing boughtvia
digitaltransmission(e.g. download to own). Questions arise as
to the possibility forusersto dispose of the filesthey buy in
this manner(e.g. by selling themor by giving them as a gift).
The principle of EU exhaustion of the distribution right
applies in the case of the distribution ofphysical copies (e.g.
when a tangible article such as a CD or a book, etc. is sold,
the right holder cannot prevent the further distribution of
that tangible article). The issue that arises here is whether
this principle can also be applied in the case of an act of
transmission equivalent in its effect to distribution
(i.e. where the buyer acquires the property of the copy). This
raises difficult questions, notably relating to the practical
application of such an approach (how to
avoidre-sellerskeepingand usinga copy ofawork afterthey have
“re-sold” it – this is often referred to as the “forward and
delete” question) as well as to theeconomic implications of the
creation of a second-hand market of copies of perfect quality
that never deteriorate (in contrast to the second-hand market
for physical goods).

[In particular if you arean end user/consumer:]Haveyou
facedrestrictions when trying to reselldigital files that you
havepurchased (e.g.mp3 file,e-book)?

YES–Please explainby giving examples

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO

NO OPINION

[In particular if you area right holder or a service provider:]
What would bethe consequencesof providing a legal framework
enabling the resale of previously purchased digital content?
Please specify per market (type of content) concerned.

[Open question]

La création d’un cadre légal autorisant la revente de contenus
numériques entraînerait la destruction du marché de l’achat à
l’acte (téléchargement), sans doute la fin du marché du
streaming également et donc l’anéantissement dans le monde
numérique de toute forme de rémunération des créateurs, des
artistes et des professionnels qui les accompagnent.Il convient
ici de rappeler que la définition de la vente en droit français
implique une dépossession du vendeur au profit de l’acquéreur.
Dans le cadre de la seconde vie des œuvres numériques, une
telle dépossession ne se produit pas. Il ne peut donc pas y
avoir vente.

Registration of works and other subject matter – is it a good
idea?

Registration is not often discussed in copyright in the EU as
the existing international treaties in the area prohibit
formalities as a condition for theprotection and
exerciseofrights. However,this prohibition is not
absolute.Moreover a system of registration does not need to be
made compulsory or constitute a precondition for the protection
and exercise of rights.With a longer term of protection and with
the increased opportunities that digital technology
providesfortheuse of content(includingolder works and works
that otherwise wouldnot havebeen disseminated),the advantages
and disadvantages of a system of registrationare increasingly
being considered.

Would the creation of a registration system at EU level help in
the identification and licensing of works and other subject
matter?

YES

NO

La création d’un système d’enregistrement ne répondrait pas aux
attentes ainsi visées en préambule. En effet, un tel système
d’enregistrement serait source de complications
administratives et de potentielles difficultés juridiques
concernant le statut de la base de données, la gestion des
doubles revendications, des doubles documentations, …. Ces
problèmes sont déjà complexes lorsqu’ils se produisent dans le
cadre de société de droit civil. Dans le cadre d’un système
européen, celui-ciaurait force d’autorité publique et la
résolutiondes litiges en serait grandement alourdie ce qui
aurait pour conséquences de complexifier encore davantage la
situation.

Un système d’identification des ayants droit dans le secteur
musical est actuellement en cours de construction, il s’agit de
la base de données appelée GRD (Global Repertoire Database).

NO OPINION

What would bethe possible advantagesof such a system?

[Open question]

Aucun. D’autres systèmes existent déjà qui font leurs preuves
(systèmes d’information des sociétés de gestion collective ou
tiers de confiance par exemple). Et d’autres sont en cours de
construction (GRD).

What would be the possible disadvantages of such a system?

[Open question]

De fortes lourdeurs administratives viendraient indubitablement
complexifier le système.

What incentives forregistrationbyrightholderscould be envisaged?

[Open question]

How to improve theuse andinteroperability ofidentifiers

There are many private databases of works and other subject
matter held by producers, collective management organisations,
and institutions such as libraries, which are based to
a greater or lesser extent on the use of (more or less)
interoperable, internationally agreed ‘identifiers’.
Identifiers can be compared to a reference number embedded in a
work, are specific to the sector in which they have been
developed, and identify, variously, the work itself, the owner
or the contributor to a work or other subject matter. There are
notable examples of where industry is undertaking actions to
improve the interoperability of such identifiers and databases.
The Global Repertoire Database should, once operational, provide
a single source of information on the ownership and control of
musical works worldwide. The Linked Content Coalition was
established to develop building blocks for the expression and
management of rights and licensing across all content and media
types. It includes the development of a Rights Reference Model
(RRM) – a comprehensive data model for all types of rights in
all types of content. The UK Copyright Hub is seeking to take
such identification systems a step further, and to create a
linked platform, enabling automated licensing across different
sectors.

What should be the role of the EU in promoting the adoption
of identifiers in the content sector, and in promoting the
development and interoperability of rights ownership and
permissions databases?

[Open question]

Les ayants droit ont déjà développé leurs propres standards
d’identification (code ISWC pour les œuvres musicales et
codes IPI pour les auteurs, compositeurs et éditeurs par
exemple). Nous ne voyons pas l’utilité de développer de
nouveaux identifiants qui viendraient surajouter une couche
d’information inutile.

Term of protection – is it appropriate?

Works and other subject matter are protected under copyright for
a limited period of time. After the term of protection has
expired, a work falls into the public domain and can be freely
used by anyone (in accordance with the applicable national
rules on moral rights). The Berne Convention requires a minimum
term of protection of 50 years after the death of the author.
The EU rules extend this term of protection to 70 years after
the death of the author (as do many other countries, e.g. the
US).

With regard to performers in the music sector and phonogram
producers, the term provided for in the EU rules also extend 20
years beyond what is mandated in international agreements,
providing for a term of protection of 70 years after the first
publication. Performers and producers in the audio-visual
sector, however, do not benefit from such an extended term of
protection.

Are the current terms of copyright protection still appropriate
in the digital environment?

YES– Please explain

Nous ne comprenons pas pour quelle raison la durée de protection
du droit d’auteur devrait être différente dans le monde
numérique par rapport au monde physique. Le fait que
l’exploitation de l’œuvre soit réalisée
numériquementn’entraîne pas une moindre nécessité pour les
créateurs et leurs ayants droit de rentabiliser leurs
investissements. Nous posons souvent la question à ceux qui
pensent que la durée de protection du droit d’auteur n’est pas
appropriée dans le monde numérique, mais nous n’avons toujours
pas reçu de réponse intelligenteà ce sujet.

En outre, la frontière n’existe plus entre numérique et physique
pour nombre d’exploitations importantes des œuvres telles que la
radiodiffusion et la télédiffusion.Ces exploitations sont
exactement les mêmes dans le numérique et le hertzien. Comment
dans ces conditions justifier de la nécessité d’une durée de
protection moindre pour leur exploitationnumérique ?

NO – Please explain if they should be longer or shorter

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO OPINION

Limitations and exceptions in the Single Market

Limitations and exceptions to copyright and related rights
enable the use of works and other protected subject-matter,
without obtaining authorisation from the rightholders, for
certain purposes and to a certain extent (for instance the use
for illustration purposes of an extract from a novel by a
teacher in a literature class). At EU level theyare established
in a number of copyright directives, most notably
Directive2001/29/EC.

Exceptions and limitations in the national and EU copyright laws
have to respect international law. In accordance with
international obligations, the EU acquis requires that
limitations and exceptions can only be applied in certain
special cases which do not conflict with a normal exploitation
of the work or other subject matter and do not unreasonably
prejudice the legitimate interest of the rightholders.

Whereas thecatalogueof limitations and exceptions included
inEUlawis exhaustive(no other exceptions can be applied to the
rights harmonised at EU level), these limitations and
exceptions areoftenoptional,in the sense thatMember Statesare
free to reflect in national legislation as many or as few of
them as they wish.Moreover,the formulation of certain of the
limitations andexceptionsis general enough to give
significantflexibility totheMember States as to how,and to what
extent,toimplement them (if they decide to do so). Finally,it is
worth noting that not all of the limitationsand
exceptionsincluded in the EUlegal framework for copyrightare of
equivalent significance in policy terms and in terms of their
potential effect on the functioning of the Single Market.

Inaddition, inthe same manner that the definition of the rights
is territorial (i.e. has an effect only within the territory of
the Member State), the definition of the limitations and
exceptions to the rights is territorial too (so an act that is
covered by an exception in a Member State "A" may still require
the authorisation of the rightholder once we move to the Member
State "B").

The cross-bordereffectoflimitations andexceptionsalsoraises the
question of fair compensation of rightholders.In some
instances,Member States are obliged to compensate rightholders
for theharm inflicted on them bya limitation orexceptionto
their rights. In other instancesMember Statesare not obliged,
butmay decide,to provide for such compensation.If a limitation
or exception triggering a mechanism of fair compensation were
to be given cross-border effect (e.g. the books are used for
illustration in an online course given by an university in
a Member State "A" and the students are in a Member State "B")
then there would also be a need to clarifywhich national law
shoulddeterminethe level of that compensation and who should
pay it.

Finally, the question of flexibility and adaptability is being
raised: what is the best mechanism to ensure that the EU and
Member States’ regulatory frameworks adapt when necessary
(either to clarify that certain uses are covered by an
exception or to confirm that for certain uses the authorisation
of rightholders is required)? The main question here is whether
a greater degree of flexibility can be introduced in the EU and
Member States regulatory framework while ensuring the required
legal certainty, including for the functioning of the Single
Market, and respecting the EU's international obligations.

Are there problems arising from the fact that most limitations
and exceptions provided in the EUcopyright directivesare
optionalfor the Member States?

YES – Please explain by referring to specific cases

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO– Please explain

La libre circulation des biens et des services n’est pas remise
en cause en l’espèce. Si des différences existent entre les
différents Etats européens sur l’administration des exceptions
au droit d’auteur, il ne faut pas oublier qu’il s’agit de
répondre à la vision que les Etats et les citoyens de ces
Etats ont de la manière dont le droit d’auteur doit être
considéré dans un projet commun en faveur de leur
développement culturel. De ce point de vue le régime
desexceptions au droit d’auteur est à la frontière entre
considérations consuméristes et vision citoyenne. Dès lors, si
l’Union européenne peut fixer les grandes lignes de ce que
peuvent être les exceptions au droit d’auteur, il revient aux
Etats d’arbitrer sur l’application ou non en droit national de
certaines exceptions et, pour les exceptions qu’ils choisissent
d’intégrer en droit local, de choisir le régime applicable.
Rappelons que la Directive 2001/29 mentionne 21 exceptions
facultatives.

NO OPINION

Should some/all of the exceptions be made mandatory and, if so,
is there aneed for a higher level of harmonisation of such
exceptions?

YES–Please explain byreferringto specific cases

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO– Please explain

Voir ci-dessus : Q.21.

NO OPINION

Should any newlimitations andexceptions be added toor removed
fromthe existing catalogue?Please explain by referring to
specific cases.

[Open question]

MASQconsidère que le traitement actuel par les directives et la
loi française des exceptions et limitations au droit d’auteur
propose une balance équitable entre les intérêts des
utilisateurs et les intérêts des ayants droit. Leur flexibilité
a été un atout majeur dans le déplacement d’un mondematériel
etanalogique vers un monde numérique. L’extension de la liste
des exceptions et des limitations au droit d’auteur fait partie
des moyens mis en œuvre pour affaiblir encore davantage le droit
d’auteur sans réflexion plus avancée sur les moyens de parvenir
à obtenir simplement une licence d’exploitation.

Independently from the questions above, is there a need to
provide for a greater degree of flexibility inthe EU regulatory
framework for limitations and exceptions?

YES– Please explain why

Il est indispensable de préserver le niveau actuel de
flexibilité pour les Etats membres dans l’adaptation des
exceptions et limitations au droit d’auteur dans les
législations locales en raison de la forteimbricationque
soulève cette question sensible entre considérations de
consommateur et préoccupations de citoyen.

NO – Please explain why

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO OPINION

If yes, what would be the best approach to provide for
flexibility? (e.g.interpretation by national courts and the
ECJ, periodic revisions of the directives, interpretations by
the Commission, built-in flexibility, e.g. in the form of a
fair-useor fair dealingprovision / open norm, etc.)?Please
explain indicating what would be the relative advantages and
disadvantages of such an approach as well as its possible
effects on the functioning of the Internal Market.

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Does the territoriality of limitations and exceptions, in your
experience,constitute a problem?

YES–Please explain why andspecify which exceptions you are
referring to

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO–Please explainwhy andspecify which exceptions you are
referring to

L’article 5 de la directive européenne sur le droit d’auteur a
été rédigée afin de tenir compte des différents besoins et
traditions des Etats membres. Le fait que les Etats membres de
l’Union européenne, de par leur sensibilité sociétale et leur
histoire,n’aient pas tous la même vision des exceptions au
droit d’auteur ne porte pas atteinte à la libre circulation des
biens et des services.

NO OPINION

In the event that limitationsand exceptionsestablished at
national level were to have cross-border effect, howshouldthe
question of “fair compensation” be addressed, whensuch
compensation is part of the exception? (e.g. who pays whom,
where?)

[Open question]

Pour MASQcette question ne soulève pas de difficulté
particulière. Dans le cas où l’application d’une exception ou
une limitation au droit d’auteur devrait avoir des conséquences
transfrontalières, la compensation équitable applicable devrait
être celle prévuepar la législation du pays dans lequel le
préjudice est constaté, conformément à la position de la CJUE
dans la décisionPadawan(Case C 467/08).

Access to content in libraries and archives

Directive2001/29/EC enablesMember Statesto reflect in their
national law a rangeoflimitations andexceptions for the benefit
of publicly accessible libraries, educational establishments and
museums, as well as archives. If implemented, these
exceptionsallow acts of preservation and archivingandenable
on-site consultation oftheworks and other subject matter in the
collections of such institutions. The public lending(under an
exception or limitation)by these establishments of physical
copies of works and other subject matter is governed by the
Rental and Lending Directive.

Questionsarise as to whetherthe current framework continues to
achieve the objectives envisaged or whether it needs to be
clarified or updated to cover use in digital networks. At the
same time, questions arise as to the effect of such a possible
expansion on the normal exploitation of works and other subject
matter and as to the prejudice this may cause to rightholders.
The role of licensing and possible framework agreements between
different stakeholders also needsto be considered here.

Preservationand archiving

The preservation of the copies of worksor othersubject-matter
held in the collections of cultural establishments (e.g. books,
records, or films)– the restoration or replacement of works, the
copying of fragile works -mayinvolvethe creation ofanother
copy/iesof these worksor othersubject matter. Most Member
States provide for an exception in their national laws allowing
for the making of such preservation copies.The scope of the
exceptiondiffersfrom Member State to Member State(as regardsthe
type of beneficiary establishments, the types of
works/subject-mattercovered by the exception, the mode of
copyingand the number of reproductions that a beneficiary
establishment may make).Also, the current legal status of new
types of preservation activities (e.g. harvesting and archiving
publicly available web content) is often uncertain.

(a)[In particular if you arean institutional user:]Have you
experienced specific problems when trying to use an exception
to preserve and archive specific works or other subject matter
in your collection?

(b)[In particular if you arearightholder:]Have you experienced
problems with the use by libraries, educational establishments,
museum or archives of the preservation exception?

YES – Please explain, by Member State, sector, and the type
of use in question.

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO

NO OPINION

If there are problems, how would they best be solved?

[Open question]

Nousn’avonspas eu l’occasion de constater de difficulté sur ce
point.Nous considérons que,quoi qu’il en soit, si des problèmes
devaient exister, ils pourraient être résolus par la conclusion
de licences entre les ayants droit et les utilisateurs. Les
licences ont l’avantage d’être plus flexibles que la loi et
doivent donc être favorisées. L’article 5 de la directive sur
le droit d’auteur est à même d’apporter des solutions pour les
cas où des problèmes seraient constatés.

If your view is that a legislative solution is needed, what
would be its main elements? Which activities of the beneficiary
institutions should be covered and under which conditions?

[Open question]

Nous n’avonspas eu l’occasion de constater de difficulté sur ce
point. Nous considérons que,quoi qu’il en soit, si des
problèmes devaient exister, ils pourraient être résolus par
laconclusion de licences entre les ayants droit et les
utilisateurs. Les licences ont l’avantage d’être plus flexibles
que la loi et doivent donc être favorisées. L’article 5 de la
directive sur le droit d’auteur est à même d’apporter des
solutions pour les cas où des problèmes seraient constatés.

If your view is thatadifferent solutionisneeded, what would it
be?

[Open question]

Nous n’avonspas eu l’occasion de constater de difficulté sur ce
point. Nous considérons que,quoi qu’il en soit, si des
problèmes devaient exister, ils pourraient être résolus par la
conclusion de licences entre les ayants droit et les
utilisateurs. Les licences ont l’avantage d’être plus flexibles
que la loi et doivent donc être favorisées. L’article 5 de la
directive sur le droit d’auteur est à même d’apporter des
solutions pour les cas où des problèmes seraient constatés.

Off-premises access to library collections

Directive 2001/29/EC provides an exception forthe consultation
ofworks and other subject-matter(consulting an e-book, watching
a documentary) viadedicated terminals on the premises of such
establishmentsfor the purpose of research and private study.
The online consultation ofworks and other subject-matter
remotely(i.e. when the library user is not on the premises of
the library)requires authorisation andis generallyaddressed in
agreements between universities/libraries and publishers.Some
argue that the law rather than agreements should provide for
the possibility to, and the conditions for,grantingonline
access to collections.

(a)[In particular if you are an institutional user:]Have you
experienced specific problems when trying to negotiate
agreements with rights holders that enable you to provide
remote access, including across borders,to your collections (or
parts thereof) for purposes of research and private study?

(b)[Inparticular if you are an enduser/consumer:]Have you
experienced specific problems when trying to consult, including
across borders,works and other subject-matter held in the
collections of institutions such as universities and national
libraries when you are not on the premises of the institutions
in question?

(c)[In particular if you are arightholder:]Have you negotiated
agreements with institutional users that enable those
institutions to provide remote access, including across
borders,to the works or other subject-matter in their
collections, for purposes of research and private study?

[Open question]

If there are problems, how would they best be solved?

[Open question]

Nous n’avonspas eu l’occasion de constater de difficulté sur ce
point. Nous considérons que,quoi qu’il en soit, si des
problèmes devaient exister, ils pourraient être résolus par la
conclusion de licences entre les ayants droit et les
utilisateurs. Les licences ont l’avantage d’être plus flexibles
que la loi et doivent donc être favorisées. L’article 5 de la
directive sur ledroit d’auteur est à même d’apporter des
solutions pour les cas où des problèmes seraient constatés.

If your view is that a legislative solution is needed, what
would be its main elements? Which activities of the beneficiary
institutions should be covered and under which conditions?

[Open question]

Nous n’avonspas eu l’occasion de constater de difficulté sur ce
point. Nous considérons que,quoi qu’il en soit, si des
problèmes devaient exister, ils pourraient être résolus par la
conclusion de licences entre les ayants droit et les
utilisateurs. Les licences ont l’avantage d’être plus flexibles
que la loi et doivent donc être favorisées. L’article 5 de la
directive sur le droit d’auteur est à même d’apporter des
solutions pour les cas où des problèmes seraient constatés.

If your view is thatadifferent solutionisneeded, what would it
be?

[Open question]

Nous n’avonspas eu l’occasion de constater de difficulté sur ce
point. Nous considérons que,quoi qu’il en soit, si des
problèmes devaient exister, ils pourraient être résolus par la
conclusion de licences entre les ayants droit et les
utilisateurs. Les licences ont l’avantage d’être plus flexibles
que la loi et doivent donc être favorisées. L’article 5 de la
directive sur le droit d’auteur est à même d’apporter des
solutions pour les cas où des problèmes seraient constatés.

E –lending

Traditionally, public libraries haveloanedphysical copies of
works (i.e. books, sometimes also CDs and DVDs) to their users.
Recent technological developments have made it technically
possible for libraries to provide users with temporary access
to digital content, such as e-books, music or films via
networks. Under the current legal framework, libraries need to
obtain the authorisation of the rights holders to
organisesuche-lending activities. In various Member States,
publishers and libraries are currently experimenting with
different business models for the making available of works
online, including direct supply of e-books to libraries by
publishers or bundling byaggregators.

(a)[In particular if you are alibrary:]Have you experienced
specific problems when trying tonegotiate agreements to enable
the electronic lending(e-lending), including across borders, of
books or other materials held in your collection?

(b)[In particular if you are an enduser/consumer:]Haveyou
experienced specific problems when trying to borrow booksor
other materialselectronically (e-lending), including across
borders,from institutionssuch as public libraries?

(c)[In particular if you are aright holder:]Have you negotiated
agreements with libraries to enable them to lend books or other
materials electronically, including across borders?

YES– Please explainwith specific examples

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO

NO OPINION

If there are problems, how wouldtheybest be solved?

[Open question]

Nous n’avonspas eu l’occasion de constater de difficulté sur ce
point. Nous considérons que,quoi qu’il en soit, si des
problèmes devaient exister, ils pourraient être résolus par la
conclusion de licences entre les ayants droit et les
utilisateurs. Les licences ont l’avantage d’être plus flexibles
que la loi et doivent donc être favorisées. L’article 5 de la
directive sur le droit d’auteur est à même d’apporter des
solutions pour les cas où des problèmes seraient constatés.

The following two questions are relevant bothtothis point (n° 3)
and the previous one (n° 2).

[In particular if you are an institutional user:]What
differences do you see in the management of physical and online
collections, including providing access to your subscribers?
What problems have you encountered?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

[In particular if you are a right holder:]What difference do you
see between libraries’traditional activities such as on-premises
consultation or public lending and activities such as
off-premises (online, at a distance) consultation and
e-lending? What problems have you encountered?

[Open question]

Nous n’avonspas eu l’occasion de constater de difficulté sur ce
point. Nous considérons que,quoi qu’il en soit, si des
problèmes devaient exister, ils pourraient être résolus par la
conclusion de licences entre les ayants droit et les
utilisateurs. Les licences ont l’avantage d’être plus flexibles
que la loi et doivent donc être favorisées. L’article 5 de la
directive sur le droit d’auteur est à même d’apporter des
solutions pour les cas où des problèmes seraient constatés.

Mass digitisation

The term “mass digitisation” is normally used to refer to
efforts by institutions such as libraries and archives to
digitise (e.g. scan) the entire content or part of their
collections with an objective to preserve these collections
and, normally, to make them available to the public. Examples
are efforts by libraries to digitise novels form the early part
of the 20thcentury or whole collections of pictures of
historical value. This matter has been partly addressed at the
EU level by the 2011 Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) on key
principles on the digitisationand making available of out
of commerce works (i.e. works which are no longer found in the
normal channels of commerce),which isaimingto facilitatemass
digitisation efforts (for books and learned journals) on the
basis of licence agreements between libraries and similar
cultural institutions on the one hand and the collecting
societies representing authors and publishers on the
other.Provided the required funding is ensured(digitisation
projects are extremely expensive),the result of this MoU should
bethat books that are currently to be found only in the archives
of, for instance, libraries will be digitised and made available
online to everyone.The MoU is based on voluntary licences
(granted by CollectiveManagement Organisations on the basis of
the mandates they receive from authors and publishers). Some
Member States may need to enact legislation to ensure the
largest possible effect ofsuchlicences (e.g. by establishing in
legislation a presumption of representation of a collecting
society or the recognition of an “extended effect” to the
licences granted).

[In particular if you are an institutional user,engaging or
wanting to engage in mass digitisation projects,a rightholder,a
collective management organisation:]Would itbe necessaryin your
country to enact legislationto ensure thattheresults of the
2011 MoU (i.e. the agreements concluded between libraries and
collecting societies) havea cross-border effect sothatout of
commerce workscan be accessedacross the EU?

YES – Please explainwhy and how it could best be achieved

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO– Please explain

La situation du Livre est très différente de celle de la Musique
sur ce point pour deux raisons, l’une technologique, l’autre
juridique.

Dans le monde physique, déjà, la musique est numérique.La
transformation d’un format numérique matérialisé à un format
numérique dématérialisé est automatisée. Il en est autrement
dès lors qu’il s’agit de transformer un support matériel
physique à un support immatériel et numérique.Dès lors, la
musique n’est confrontée ni à la problématique des coûts de
numérisation ni à l’indisponibilité des ouvrages.

La gestion collective est très répandue dans le secteur musical
permettant d’obtenir des autorisations très larges sur des
répertoires variés.

Ces deux spécificitéscoupléesdu secteur de la musique permettent
d’affirmer que la problématique des œuvres indisponibles
n’existe pas dans le secteur musical.

NO OPINION

Would it be necessary to develop mechanisms, beyond those
already agreed for other types of content (e.g. for audio- or
audio-visual collections, broadcasters’ archives)?

 YES – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO– Please explain

La situation du Livre est très différente de celle de la Musique
sur ce point pour deux raisons, l’une technologique, l’autre
juridique.

Dans le monde physique, déjà, la musique est numérique.La
transformation d’un format numérique matérialisé à un format
numérique dématérialisé est automatisée. Il en est autrement
dès lors qu’il s’agit de transformer un support matériel
physique à un support immatériel et numérique.Dès lors, la
musique n’est confrontée ni à la problématique des coûts de
numérisation ni à l’indisponibilité des ouvrages.

La gestion collective est très répandue dans le secteur musical
permettant d’obtenir des autorisations très larges sur des
répertoires variés.

Ces deux spécificitéscouplées du secteur de la musiquepermettent
d’affirmer que la problématique des œuvres indisponibles
n’existe pas dans le secteur musical.

NO OPINION

Teaching

Directive 2001/29/EC enables Member States to implement in their
national legislationlimitations and exceptionsfor the purpose of
illustration fornon-commercialteaching. Such exceptions would
typically allow a teacher to use parts of or full works to
illustrate his course,e.g.by distributing copies of fragments
of a book or of newspaper articles in the classroom or by
showing protected content on a smart boardwithout having to
obtain authorisation from the right holders.The open
formulation of this (optional) provision allows for rather
different implementation at Member States level.The
implementation of the exception differs from Member State to
Member State, with several Member States providinginsteada
framework for the licensing of contentforcertain
educationaluses. Some argue that the lawshould provide for
better possibilities for distance learningand study at home.

(a)[In particular if youare an enduser/consumeror an
institutional user:]Have you experienced specific problems when
trying to use works orother subject-matter for illustration for
teaching, including across borders?

(b)[In particular if youare aright holder:]Have youexperienced
specificproblems resulting from the wayin which works or other
subject-matter are used for illustration for teaching,
including across borders?

YES – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO

Nous n’avonspas eu l’occasion de constater de difficulté sur ce
point. Nous considérons que,quoi qu’il en soit, si des
problèmes devaient exister, ils pourraient être résolus par la
conclusion de licences entre les ayants droit et les
utilisateurs. Les licences ont l’avantage d’être plus flexibles
que la loi et doivent donc être favorisées. L’article 5 de la
directive sur le droit d’auteur est à même d’apporter des
solutions pour les cas où des problèmes seraient constatés.

NO OPINION

If there are problems, how wouldtheybest be solved?

[Open question]

Nous n’avonspas eu l’occasion de constater de difficulté sur ce
point. Nous considérons que,quoi qu’il en soit, si des
problèmes devaient exister, ils pourraient être résolus par la
conclusion de licences entre les ayants droit et les
utilisateurs. Les licences ont l’avantage d’être plus flexibles
que la loi et doivent donc être favorisées. L’article 5 de la
directive sur le droit d’auteur est à même d’apporter des
solutions pour les cas où des problèmes seraient constatés.

What mechanisms exist in the market place to facilitate the use
of content for illustration for teaching purposes?How
successful are they?

[Open question]

If your view is that a legislative solution is needed, what
would be its main elements? Which activities of the beneficiary
institutions should be covered and under what conditions?

[Open question]

Nous n’avonspas eu l’occasion de constater de difficulté sur ce
point. Nous considérons que,quoi qu’il en soit, si des
problèmes devaient exister, ils pourraient être résolus par la
conclusion de licences entre les ayants droit et les
utilisateurs. Les licences ont l’avantage d’être plus flexibles
que la loi et doivent donc être favorisées. L’article 5 de la
directive sur le droit d’auteur est à même d’apporter des
solutions pour les cas où des problèmes seraient constatés.

If your view is thatadifferent solutionisneeded, what would it
be?

[Open question]

Nous n’avonspas eu l’occasion de constater de difficulté sur ce
point. Nous considérons que,quoi qu’il en soit, si des
problèmes devaient exister, ils pourraient être résolus par la
conclusion de licences entre les ayants droit et les
utilisateurs. Les licences ont l’avantage d’être plus flexibles
que la loi et doivent donc être favorisées. L’article 5 de la
directive sur le droit d’auteur est à même d’apporter des
solutions pour les cas où des problèmes seraient constatés.

Research

Directive 2001/29/ECenables Member States to choose whether to
implement in their national laws a limitation for the purpose
of non-commercial scientific research.Theopenformulation of
this (optional) provision allows forratherdifferent
implementationsat Member States level.

(a)[In particular if you arean enduser/consumeror an
institutional user:]Haveyou experienced specific problems when
trying to use works or other subject matter in thecontextof
research projects/activities, including across borders?

(b)[In particular if you area right holder:]Haveyouexperienced
specificproblems resulting from the wayin which works or other
subject-matter are usedin thecontextof research
projects/activities, including across borders?

YES – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO

Nous n’avonspas eu l’occasion de constater de difficulté sur ce
point. Nous considérons que,quoi qu’il en soit, si des
problèmes devaient exister, ils pourraient être résolus par la
conclusion de licences entre les ayants droit et les
utilisateurs. Les licences ont l’avantaged’être plus flexibles
que la loi et doivent donc être favorisées. L’article 5 de la
directive sur le droit d’auteur est à même d’apporter des
solutions pour les cas où des problèmes seraient constatés.

NO OPINION

If there are problems, how wouldtheybest be solved?

[Open question]

Nous n’avonspas eu l’occasion de constater de difficulté sur ce
point. Nous considérons que,quoi qu’il en soit, si des
problèmes devaient exister, ils pourraient être résolus par la
conclusion de licences entre les ayants droit et les
utilisateurs. Les licences ont l’avantage d’être plus flexibles
que la loi et doivent donc être favorisées. L’article 5 de la
directive sur le droit d’auteur est à même d’apporter des
solutions pour les cas où des problèmes seraient constatés.

What mechanisms exist in the Member States to facilitate the use
of content for research purposes?How successful are they?

[Open question]

Lorsqu’une bibliothèque est confrontée à une demande de
reprographie d’une partition aux fins de recherche par un
usager, celle-ci demande l’autorisation à l’éditeur de l’œuvre
visée qui consent une autorisation à titre gracieux.

Disabilities

Directive 2001/29/EC provides for an exception/limitation for
the benefit of people with a disability.The open formulation of
this (optional) provision allows for rather different
implementations at Member States level.At EU and international
level projects have been launched to increase the
accessibilityof works and other subject-matterforpersons with
disabilities (notably by increasing the number of works
published in special formats and facilitating their
distribution across the European Union).

The Marrakesh Treaty has been adopted to facilitate access to
published works for persons who are blind, visually impaired,
or otherwise print disabled. The Treaty creates a mandatory
exception to copyright that allows organisations for the blind
to produce, distribute and make available accessible format
copies to visually impaired persons without the authorisation
of the rightholders. The EU and its Member Stateshave
startedwork to sign and ratify the Treaty. This may require the
adoption of certain provisions at EU level (e.g. to ensure the
possibility to exchange accessible format copies across
borders).

(a)[Inparticular if you are a person with a disability or an
organisation representing persons with disabilities:]Have you
experienced problems with accessibility to content, including
across borders,arising from Member States’ implementation of
this exception?

(b)[Inparticular if you are an organisationproviding services
for persons with disabilities:]Have you experienced problems
when distributing/communicating works published in special
formats across the EU?

(c)[In particular if you are a rightholder:]Have you experienced
specificproblems resulting fromthe application of limitations or
exceptions allowing for the distribution/communication of works
published in special formats, including across borders?

YES–Please explainby giving examples

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO

Nous n’avonspas eu l’occasion de constater de difficulté sur ce
point. Nous considérons que,quoi qu’il en soit, si des
problèmes devaient exister, ils pourraient être résolus par la
conclusion de licences entre les ayants droit et les
utilisateurs. Les licences ont l’avantage d’être plus flexibles
que la loi et doivent donc être favorisées. L’article 5 de la
directive sur le droit d’auteur est à même d’apporter des
solutions pour les cas où des problèmes seraient constatés.

NO OPINION

Ifthere are problems, what could be done to improve
accessibility?

[Open question]

Nous n’avonspas eu l’occasion de constater de difficulté sur ce
point. Nous considérons que,quoi qu’il en soit, si des
problèmes devaient exister, ils pourraient être résolus par la
conclusion de licences entre les ayants droit et les
utilisateurs. Les licences ont l’avantage d’être plus flexibles
que la loi et doivent donc être favorisées. L’article 5 de la
directive sur le droit d’auteur est à même d’apporter des
solutions pour les cas où des problèmes seraient constatés.

What mechanisms exist in the market place to facilitate
accessibility to content? How successful are they?

[Open question]

En France, la BNF (Bibliothèque Nationale de France) a développé
et administre une plateforme – PLATON - dont le but est de
permettre l’accès aux œuvres écrites (dont les partitions
d’œuvres musicales) pour une transformation dans un format
accessible aux personnes aveugles ou handicapées visuelles. Le
mécanisme mis en place prévoit que les associations
représentants les personnes aveugles et handicapées visuelles
et agréées par le Ministère de la Culture et de la
Communication demandent l’accès par l’intermédiaire de PLATON
aux éditeurs qui leur fournissent des fichiers numériques des
œuvres dans un format permettant leur transformation dans un
format accessible aux personnes aveugles et handicapées
visuelles1

https://exceptionhandicap.bnf.fr/platon-web/

.

Text and data mining

Text and data mining/content mining/data analytics are different
terms used to describe increasingly important techniques used in
particular by researchers for the exploration of vast amounts of
existing texts and data (e.g., journals, web sites, databases
etc.). Through the useof software or other automated processes,
an analysis is made of relevant texts and data in order to
obtain new insights, patterns and trends.

The texts and data used for mining are either freely accessible
on the internet or accessible through subscriptions to e.g.
journals and periodicals that give access to the databases of
publishers. A copy is made of the relevant texts and data (e.g.
on browser cache memories or in computers RAM memories or onto
the hard disk of a computer), prior to the actual analysis.
Normally, it is considered that to mine protected works or
other subject matter, it is necessary to obtain authorisation
from the right holders for the making of such copies unless
such authorisation can be implied (e.g. content accessible to
general public without restrictions on the internet, open
access).

Some argue that the copies required for text and data mining are
covered by the exception for temporary copies in Article 5.1 of
Directive 2001/29/EC. Others consider that text and data mining
activities should not even be seen as covered by copyright. None
of thisis clear, in particular since text and data mining does
not consist only of a single method, but can be undertaken in
several different ways. Important questions also remain as to
whether the main problems arising in relation to this issue go
beyond copyright (i.e. beyond the necessity or not to obtain
the authorisation to use content) and relate rather to the need
to obtain “access” to content (i.e. being able to use e.g.
commercial databases).

A specific Working Group was set up on this issue in the
framework of the "Licences for Europe" stakeholder dialogue. No
consensus was reached among participating stakeholders on either
the problems to be addressed or the results. At the same time,
practical solutions to facilitate text and data mining of
subscription-based scientific content were presented by
publishers as an outcome of “Licences for Europe”.In the
context of these discussions, other stakeholders argued that no
additional licences should be required to mine material to which
access has been provided through a subscriptionagreement and
considered that a specific exception for text and data mining
should be introduced, possibly on the basis of a distinction
between commercial and non-commercial.

(a)[In particular if you are an enduser/consumeror an
institutional user:]Haveyou experiencedobstacles,linked to
copyright,when trying to usetext or data miningmethods,
including across borders?

(b)[In particular if you are aservice provider:]Have you
experienced obstacles, linked to copyright, when providing
services based on text or data mining methods, including across
borders?

(c)[In particular if you are a rightholder:]Have you experienced
specificproblems resulting fromthe use of text and data mining
in relation to copyright protected content, including across
borders?

YES–Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO–Please explain

NO OPINION

If there are problems, how wouldtheybest be solved?

[Open question]

Si des problèmes existaient, ils pourraient être résolus par la
conclusion de licences.

Il convient que la Commission européenne soit extrêmement
prudente dans ce domaine. Les pratiques sont encore nouvelles
et leurs usages à venir et donc les conséquences futures sur le
droit d’auteur, sont encore mal appréhendés, même par les
spécialistes du secteur du Text & Data Mining.

If your view is that a legislative solution is needed, what
would be its main elements? Which activities should be covered
and under what conditions?

[Open question]

Une solution législative n’est pas nécessaire dans ce domaine
dans la mesure où des licences d’utilisation sont possibles
dans le cadre légal existantMASQn’est pas favorable à une
inflation législative inutile qui ne serait pas conforme à
l’efficacité que les Européens attendent de l’Europe.

If your view is thatadifferent solutionisneeded, what would it
be?

[Open question]

Une autre solution que la solution législative est en effet
incontournable, il s’agit de la négociation et la conclusion
entre les ayants droit et les utilisateurs de technologies de
Text and Data Mining de licences d’utilisation.

Are there other issues, unrelated to copyright, that constitute
barriers to the use of text or data mining methods?

[Open question]

Non,nous n’avonsconnaissance d’aucune barrière de quelque sorte
que ce soit qui puisse constituer un frein à la pratique du
Text & Data Mining sur les œuvres en général et sur les œuvres
musicales en particulier.

User-generated content

Technological and service developments mean that citizens can
copy, use and distribute content at little to no financial
cost. As a consequence, new types of online activities are
developing rapidly, including the making of so-called
“user-generated content”. While users can create totally
original content, they can also take one or several
pre-existing works, change something in the work(s), and upload
the result on the Internet e.g. to platforms and blogs.
User-generated content (UGC) can thus coverthe modification of
pre-existing works even if the newly-generated/"uploaded" work
does not necessarily require a creative effort and results from
merely adding, subtracting or associating some pre-existing
content with other pre-existing content. This kind of activity
is not “new” as such. However, the development of social
networking and social media sites that enable users to share
content widely has vastly changed the scale of such activities
and increased the potential economic impact for those holding
rights in the pre-existing works. Re-use is no longer the
preserve of a technically and artistically adept elite. With
the possibilities offered by the new technologies, re-use is
open to all, at no cost. This in turn raises questions with
regard to fundamental rights such the freedom of expression and
the right to property.

A specific Working Group was set up on this issue in the
framework of the"Licences for Europe" stakeholder dialogue. No
consensuswas reachedamong participating stakeholderson either
the problems tobe addressed or the resultsor even the
definition of UGC. Nevertheless, awide range of viewswere
presentedas to the best way to respond to this phenomenon.
Oneviewwasto say that a new exception is needed to cover UGC,
in particular non-commercial activities by individuals such as
combining existing musical works with videos, sequences of
photos, etc. Anotherview wasthat no legislative change is
needed: UGC is flourishing, and licensing schemes are
increasingly available (licence schemes concluded between
rightholders and platforms as well as micro-licences concluded
between rightholders and the usersgenerating thecontent. In any
event, practical solutions to ease user-generated content and
facilitate micro-licensing for small users were pledged by
rightholders across different sectors as a result of the
“Licences for Europe” discussions.

(a)[In particular if you are an enduser/consumer:]Have you
experienced problems when trying to use pre-existing works or
other subject matter to disseminate new content on the
Internet, including across borders?

(b)[In particular if you are a service provider:]Have you
experienced problems when users publish/disseminatenew content
based on the pre-existing works or other subject-matter through
your service, including across borders?

(c)[In particular if you are a right holder:]Have you
experienced problems resulting from the way the users are using
pre-existing works or other subject-matter to disseminate new
content on the Internet, including across borders?

 YES – Please explain by giving examples

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO

Avant toute chose, et comme la Commission le rappelle dans les
propos introductifs ci-dessus,MASQtient à souligner qu’aucun
consensus n’a pu être trouvé entre les participants au groupe
de travail sur lesUsers generated contentsdans le cadre de la
réflexion des Licences pour l’Europe (WG2 in LfE) et ce qu’il
s’agisse de l’expression des problèmes rencontrés ou de la
définition de ce qu’est un UGC. Le sujet n’étant pas
clairement identifié, il nous semble prématuré de s’en emparer
de manière rigide.

Lorsqu’il s’agit d’UGC, les ayants droit ne sont pas
juridiquement dépourvus et le type d’utilisation visé n’est pas
nouveau. La nouveauté réside peut-être et uniquement dans le
volume d’utilisations.. Les sociétés de gestion collective
comme la SACEM prévoient déjà ces utilisations dans leurs
contrats généraux avec les plateformes de vidéo.

NO OPINION

(a)[In particular if you are an end user/consumer or aright
holder:]Have you experienced problems when trying to ensure
that the work you have created (on the basis of pre-existing
works) is properly identified for online use?Are proprietary
systems sufficient in this context?

(b)[In particular if you are a service provider:]Do you provide
possibilities for users that are publishing/disseminating the
works they have created (on the basis of pre-existing works)
through your service to properly identify these works for
online use?

 YES – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO– Please explain

Ces utilisations des œuvres étant couvertes par la gestion
collective, la question de l’identification des œuvres est
appréhendée à travers la documentation des sociétés de gestion
collective et les techniques de
reconnaissancemusicaledéveloppées par des sociétés
spécialisées. En outre, la SACEM est très concernée par ces
problématiques et développe d’autres partenariats utiles tels
le recours à des tiers de confiance.

En outre, comme nous l’avons déjà évoqué, la GRD apportera
prochainement un outil idéal dans le domaine de
l’identification des œuvres.

NO OPINION

(a)[In particular if you are an enduser/consumeror aright
holder):]Have you experienced problems when trying to be
remunerated for the use of the work you have created (on the
basis of pre-existing works)?

(b)[In particular if you are a service provider:]Do you provide
remuneration schemes for users publishing/disseminating the
works they have created (on the basis of pre-existing works)
through your service?

 YES – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO– Please explain

La CSDEM trouve très étonnant que la consultation tienne à
souligner les difficultés rencontrées par les créateurs d’UGCs
pour être rémunérésau titre de la diffusion de ces UGCs tout en
s’inquiétant que ceux-ci disposent d’une grande flexibilité pour
utiliser des œuvres pré-existantes.

Quoi qu’il en soit, les plateformes de diffusion d’UGCs telles
que Youtube et Dailymotion prévoient des modalités de
rémunération de leurs créateurs.

NO OPINION

If there are problems, how would they best be solved?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

If your view is that a legislative solution is needed, what
would be its main elements? Which activities should be covered
and under what conditions?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

If your view is thatadifferent solutionisneeded, what would it
be?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Private copying and reprography

Directive 2001/29/EC enables Member States to implement in their
national legislation exceptions or limitations to the
reproduction right for copies made for private useand
photocopying.Levies are charges imposed at national level on
goods typically used forsuch purposes(blank media, recording
equipment, photocopying machines, mobile listening devices such
as mp3/mp4 players, computers, etc.) with a viewtocompensating
rightholders forthe harm they suffer whencopiesaremade
withouttheirauthorisation by certain categories of persons
(i.e. natural persons making copies for their private use)
orthrough use of certain technique (i.e. reprography).In that
context, levies are important for rightholders.

With the constant developments in digital technology, the
question arises as to whether the copying of files by
consumers/end-users who have purchased content online - e.g.
when a person has bought an MP3 fileandgoes on
tostoremultiplecopies of thatfile(in her computer, her tablet
and her mobile phone) -alsotriggers, or should trigger,the
application of private copying levies. It is argued that, in
some cases,these leviesmay indeedbe claimedby
rightholderswhetheror notthelicence feepaid by the service
provideralready covers copies made bythe enduser.
Thisapproachcould potentially lead to instances of double
payments whereby levies could be claimed on top ofservice
providers’licencefees.

There is also an on-going discussion as to the application or
not of levies to certain types of cloud-based services such as
personal lockers or personal video recorders.

In your view, is there a need to clarify at the EU level the
scope and application of theprivate copyingand
reprographyexceptions in the digital environment?

YES–Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO–Please explain

La CJUE a su construire en quelques années une jurisprudence
riche et constante à même de répondre aux questions les plus
complexes dans le domaine de ces exceptions et des
compensations y afférentes.

En outre, s’agissant de la rémunérationpour copie privée, il
semble indispensable àMASQde préciser à quel point cette
question est ancrée dans le fonctionnement culturel des Etats
membres,particulièrement en France. Les arbitrages qui peuvent
être réalisés par l’Etat français le sont dans l’intérêt des
créateurs, d’une part, et du renouvellement de la création,
d’autre part. C’est ainsi que la loi française consacre
depuis 1997 que 25% des sommes perçues au titre de la
rémunérationpour copie privée sontdestinéspar les sociétés de
gestioncollective qui les gèrent à des actions d’aide à la
création, la diffusion de spectacle vivant et à des actions de
formation des artistes (article L. 321-9 du CPI). Depuis bientôt
20 ans, ce qu’on appelle communément les « 25% copie privée »
contribuent notamment au financement des festivals disséminés
dans toutes les régions de France en accompagnement des
communes, des départements ou des régions, favorisant la
dynamique culturelle et économique locale. Il convient dès lors
de toujours conserver à l’esprit cette dimension culturelle
attachée, dans certains pays, au principe, au montant et à la
gestion de la rémunérationpour copie privée.

NO OPINION

Should digital copies made by end users for private purposes in
the context of a service that has been licensed by
rightholders, and where theharmto the rightholder is minimal,
be subject to private copying levies?

 YES – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO OPINION

How would changes in levies with respect to the application
toonline services (e.g.services based oncloud computing
allowing, for instance, usersto have copieson different
devices)impactthe development and functioning ofnewbusiness
modelson the one hand and rightholders’ revenue on the other?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Would you see an added value in making levies visibleon the
invoices for products subject to levies?

YES–Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO–Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO OPINION

Divergingnational systems levy different products and apply
different tariffs. This results in obstacles tothefree
circulation of goods and servicesin the Single Market.At the
same time, many Member States continue to
allowtheindiscriminate application of private copying levies to
all transactions irrespective of the person to whom the product
subject to a levyis sold(e.g. private person or business). In
that context, not all Member States have ex ante exemption
and/or ex post reimbursement schemes which could remedy these
situations and reduce the number of undue payments.

Have you experienced a situation whereacross-border transaction
resulted inundue levy payments, or duplicate payments of the
same levy, or other obstacles to the free movement of goods or
services?

YES–Pleasespecify the type of transaction and indicate
thepercentageoftheundue payments. Please also indicatehow a
priori exemption and/orex post reimbursement schemes could help
to remedy the situation.

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO–Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO OPINION

What percentage of products subject to a levy is sold to persons
other than natural persons for purposes clearly unrelated to
private copying? Do any of those transactions result in undue
payments? Please explain in detail the example you provide
(type of products, type of transaction, stakeholders, etc.).

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Where such undue payments arise, what percentage of trade do
they affect? To what extent could a priori exemptionsand/orex
post reimbursement schemes existing in some Member States help
to remedy the situation?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Ifyou have identified specificproblemswith the current
functioning of the levy system, howwould these
problemsbestbesolved?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Fairremuneration of authors and performers

TheEUcopyrightacquisrecognises for authors and performers a
number of exclusive rights and, in the case of performers whose
performances are fixed in phonograms, remuneration rights. There
are few provisions in the EU copyright law governing
thetransferof rights from authors or performers to producersor
determining who the owner of the rights is when the work or
other subject matter is created in the context of an employment
contract. Thisis an area that has been traditionally left for
Member States to regulate and there are significant differences
in regulatory approaches.Substantial differences also exist
between different sectors of the creative industries.

Concerns continue to be raised that authors and performers are
not adequately remunerated, in particular but not solely, as
regards online exploitation. Many consider that the economic
benefit of new forms of exploitation is not being fairly shared
along the whole value chain. Another commonly raised issue
concerns contractual practices, negotiation mechanisms,
presumptions of transfer of rights, buy-out clauses and the
lack of possibility to terminate contracts. Some stakeholders
are of the opinion that rules at national level do not suffice
to improve their situation and that action at EU level is
necessary.

[In particular if you arean author/performer:] What is the best
mechanism (or combination of mechanisms) to ensure that you
receive an adequate remuneration for the exploitation of your
works and performances?

[Open question]

Les créateurs ont avant tout besoin de droits exclusifs
renforcés à même de leur assurer la rémunération équitable de
leur travail créatif. Ils ont également besoin de confier leurs
droits à des partenaires librement choisis qui auront la liberté
de négocier équitablement des licences d’exploitation de leurs
œuvres.

En France, 80% des droits des auteurs et compositeurs sont gérés
par l’intermédiaire d’une société de gestion collective, la
SACEM au Conseil d’administration de laquelle les auteurs,
auteurs-réalisateurset compositeurs représententplus de2/3 des
administrateurs et des droits de vote. Les décisions prises au
sein de ce Conseil d’administration le sont donc à leur
avantage.

Is there a need to act at the EU level (for instance to prohibit
certain clauses in contracts)?

YES–Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO–Please explainwhy

Nousn’identifionspas, dans les contrats signés par les auteurs
et compositeurs avec les éditeurs, de clauses susceptibles
d’être censurées que ce soit par le législateur français ou
européen.

NO OPINION

Ifyou consider that the current rules are not effective, what
would you suggest to addresstheshortcomingsyou identify?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Respectforrights

Directive 2004/48/EE provides for a harmonised framework for the
civil enforcement of intellectual property rights, including
copyright and related rights. The Commission has consulted
broadly on this text. Concerns have been raised as to whether
some of its provisions are still fit to ensure a proper respect
for copyright in the digital age. On the one hand, the current
measures seem to be insufficient to deal with the new
challenges brought by the dissemination of digital content on
the internet; on the other hand, there are concerns about the
current balance between enforcement of copyright and the
protection of fundamental rights, in particular the right for a
private life and data protection. While it cannot be contested
that enforcement measures should always be available in case of
infringement of copyright, measures could be proposed to
strengthen respect for copyright when the infringed content is
used for a commercial purpose. One means to do this could be to
clarify the role of intermediaries in the IP infrastructure. At
the same time,there could beclarification of the
safeguardsforrespect of private life and data protection for
private users.

Shouldthe civil enforcement system in the EU be rendered more
efficient for infringements of copyright committed with a
commercial purpose?

YES– Please explain

Le renforcement de l’application des droits en matière civile
est une question cruciale et prioritaire. La résolution des
litiges devant les tribunaux est coûteuse et chronophage. Il
serait plus qu’utiled’établir des règles au niveau européen
pour la mise en place de procédures simplifiées dans le cadre
d’actions en contrefaçon, de même qu’indiquer les
bonnespratiques à suivre en matièred’indemnisation des dommages
subis. Les règles concernant les injonctions devraient également
faire l’objet d’une harmonisation entre les Etats membres de
l’Union européenne. Leur forte disparité d’un pays membreà
l’autre est source de dysfonctionnement dans leur exécution.

Il serait également très utile que la Commission européenne
s’attache à assurer dans un calendrier restreint la
reconnaissance transfrontalière des décisions de justice en
matière de propriété littéraire et artistique.

MASQtient à souligner qu’il serait inconsidéré, voire périlleux,
d’opérer une distinction entre les usages qualifiés de
« commerciaux » ou « marchands » et des usages dits
« non-commerciaux » ou « non-marchands ». Dans
l’environnement numérique, ce qui peut apparaître comme
« non-commercial » aux yeux du consommateur final ne l’est
pas forcément. Ce n’est pas parce qu’un usage est gratuit pour
le consommateur, qu’il est « non-commercial ». D’autresactes de
commerce que le prix payé par le consommateur ou la publicité
affichée sur les pages visionnées et les abonnementsexistent
autour des œuvres sur internet. Ainsi, la récolte de données
personnelles des internautes à des fins de ciblage publicitaire
est un des modes de rémunération les plus répandus dans
l’univers numérique. Aussi est-il indispensable de conserver
à l’esprit que, « indépendamment de la potentielle gratuité du
système pour les utilisateurs, ces échanges (de biens
culturelsNDLR) sont à la source de bénéfices pour la grande
majorité des intermédiaires qui les facilitent. Ces bénéfices
sont caractéristiques d’un système pleinement marchand, qui
tire profit de l’acte d’échange et de la nature des biens
échangés. A ce titre, qualifier ces « échanges »,
quis’appuient sur des intermédiaires dégageant un bénéfice
marchand, de « non marchands » n’est pas exact. »2

Hadopi, Département Recherche, Etudes et Veille (DREV),Accès aux
œuvres sur internet,
07/2013 :http://www.hadopi.fr/sites/default/files/20130724-Accesauxoeuvressurinternet.pdf

NO – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO OPINION

In particular,isthe current legal framework clear enough to
allow forsufficient involvement of intermediaries (such as
Internet service providers, advertising brokers, payment
service providers, domain name registrars, etc.) in inhibiting
online copyright infringements with a commercial purpose? If
not, whatmeasureswould be useful to foster the cooperation of
intermediaries?

[Open question]

Non, le cadre juridique existant n’est pas suffisamment clair
dans ce domaine et les intermédiaires devraient être davantage
impliqués dans la mise en place de solutions simples de
protection du droit d’auteur et dans des actions de pédagogie
relativement à la promotion de l’offre légale et au respect des
droits d’auteur sur internet.

Ainsi, est-il indispensable d’introduire la notion denotice &
stay downdans les obligations des hébergeurs. Les ayants droit
déploient des moyens disproportionnés pour faire retirer les
contenus illégalement mis en ligne par les internautes sur les
sites. Une fois les contenus retirés, ces derniers
réapparaissent dans les heures qui suivent rendant le travail
des ayants droit dans ce domaine plus digne du châtiment de
Sysiphe que de la solution pérenne. Si les hébergeurs se
voyaient imposer simplement une obligation de retrait à la
demande des ayants droit assortie d’une obligation de maintenir
le retrait sur les œuvres notifiées, le travail de notification
des ayants droit prendrait alors tout son sens.

Does the current civil enforcement framework ensure that the
right balance is achieved between the right to have one’s
copyright respected and other rights such as the
protectionofprivate life and protection of personal data?

YES– Please explain

Dans la mesure où des actions de relevé de données personnelles
sont opérées dans un cadre judiciaire ou, à tout le moins,
contrôléespar le juge,nous considéronsque la protection de la
vie privée n’est pas remise en cause ni la protection des
données personnelles. En revanche, nous estimonsque constitue
une atteinte grave à la protection des données personnelles et
de la vie privée la collecte de données personnelles par les
intermédiaires techniques, sans contrôle du juge et dans le
seul but de ciblage publicitaire (cf.supra Q. 75).

NO–Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO OPINION

A single EU Copyright Title

The idea ofestablishing aunifiedEU CopyrightTitlehas been
presentin the copyright debate for quite some time now,
although views as to the merits and the feasibility of such an
objective are divided. A unified EU Copyright Title would
totally harmonise the area of copyright law in the EU and
replace national laws. There would then be a single EU title
instead of a bundle of national rights. Some see this as the
only manner in which a truly Single Market for content
protected by copyright can be ensured, while others believe
that the same objective can better be achieved by establishing
a higher level of harmonisation while allowing for a certain
degree of flexibility and specificity in Member States’ legal
systems.

Should the EU pursue the establishment of a single EU Copyright
Title, as a means of establishing a consistent framework for
rights and exceptions to copyright across the EU, as well as a
single framework for enforcement?

YES

NO

Tout projet de création dans le domaine du droit d’auteur d’un
cadre européen contraignant pour les Etats membres en lieu et
place des législations nationales affecterait la capacité des
Etats membres à respecter les valeurs culturelles auxquelles
les peuples sont attachés.

NO OPINION

Should this be the next step in the development of copyright in
the EU? Does the current level of difference among the Member
State legislation mean that this is a longer term project?

[Open question]

MASQconsidère qu’il n’est pas dans l’intérêt des Etats membres
de l’Union européenne ni du respect des valeurs culturelles
européennes de développer plus avant cette idée.

Other issues

The above questionnaire aims to provide a comprehensive
consultation on the most important matters relating to the
current EU legal framework for copyright. Should any important
matters have been omitted, we would appreciate if you could
bring them to our attention, so they can be properly addressed
in the future.

Are there any other important matters related to the EU legal
framework forcopyright?Pleaseexplainandindicatehow such matters
should be addressed.

[Open question]

MASQtient à souligner que la voie à suivre est celle du soutien
à l’offre légale en ligne. En effet, seul un renforcement de
l’offre légale permettra de garantir dans un même mouvement
l’accès aux œuvres pour les consommateurs et un niveau élevé
de protection pour les créateurs.

Plusieurs axes méritent d’être étudiés dans cette perspective.

Tout d’abord, il convient de renforcer les moyens mis à la
disposition des ayants droit pour assurer la lutte contre les
usages illicites des œuvres et ce en associant les
intermédiaires techniques à ce grand chantier.

Ensuite, la pédagogie est un axe primordial dont il convient de
s’emparer rapidement. Il est indispensable que les jeunes
générations soient sensibilisées à la nécessaire protection
des créateurs pour le renouvellement de la création. Des
initiatives existent en Europe qu’il conviendrait d’encourager
et de décliner dans les autres Etats membres. Il en va ainsipar
exemplede l’action de l’association Childnet International3

http://www.childnet.com/

en Grande-Bretagne et du programme Génération numérique de
l’association Calysto en France4

http://www.generationnumerique.com/

.

Enfin, afin de permettre l’émergence de champions européens du
numérique, il devient urgent de s’affairer autour de la
question de la fiscalité et des facilités accordées aux géants
non européens pour optimiser fiscalement leur présence en
Europe. De ce pointde vue et sans plus de commentaire, nous
citerons Jeff Bezos, PDG d’Amazon.com, Inc :« Nous mettons au
point un service Web qui nous permettra de ne plus recourir aux
services d’avocats fiscalistes mais ça ne fonctionne pas
encore »5

Cité dans : République française, Ministère de l’économie et des
finances, Ministère du redressement productif, Pierre Collin et
Nicolas Colin,Mission d’expertise sur la fiscalité de
l’économie numérique, janvier
2013 :http://www.redressement-productif.gouv.fr/files/rapport-fiscalite-du-numerique_2013.pdf

.

D’un tout autre point de vue,MASQtient à dénoncer la pratique,
observée en France et dans d’autres pays de l’Union européenne,
de l’accaparement de programmes par les chaînes de télévision,
appelée également édition coercitive. Il s’agit pour les
chaînes de télévision de soumettre l’utilisation d’une œuvre
musicale dans ses programmes à la condition que l’auteur
et/oule compositeur de l’œuvre visé lui cède ses droits
patrimoniaux sur l’œuvre et ce au détriment de l’éditeur de
musique qui accompagne souvent depuis longtemps l’auteur et le
compositeur. Il convient à cet égard de rappeler que les
chaînes de TV diffusent les œuvres musicales, mais n’apportent
pas de participation financière à la création ni de l’œuvre
diffusée, ni des futurs répertoires. Cette mission revient à
l’éditeur de musique. Or, la coédition coercitive entraîne
un appauvrissement de la capacité des éditeurs de musique à
financer le renouvellement des talents.

Dans ce domaine, une auto-régulation est impossible. En effet,
il n’existe pas de sanction, un éditeur qui viendrait à se
plaindre de cette pratique serait immédiatement évincé du
marché par les chaînes de télévision, la filiale « édition
musicale » des grands médias pourrait changer de société de
gestion collective si la SACEM, en France, venait à les
enjoindre à cesser cette pratique.

MASQplaide pour une étude de ces pratiques sur le fondement du
droit de la concurrence et ce aux fins de maintenir une balance
des intérêts équitables entre les ayants droit et les grands
médias.

