


Public Consultationonthe review oftheEUcopyright rules

NAME

OUR CONTRIBUTION CAN BE PUBLISHED IN ANONYMOUS FORM

I.Rights and the functioning of the Single Market

A. Why is it not possible to access many online content services
from anywhere in Europe?

[The territorial scope of the rights involved in digital
transmissions and the segmentation of the market through
licensing agreements]

Holders of copyright and related rights-e.g. writers, singers,
musicians-do not enjoy a single protection in theEU.Instead,
they are protected on the basis of a bundle of national rights
in each Member State. Those rights have been largely harmonised
bythe existingEUDirectives. However, differences remain and the
geographical scope of the rights is limited to the territory of
the Member State granting them. Copyright is thus territorial in
the sense that rights are acquired and enforced on a
country-by-country basis under national law1

This principle has been confirmed by the Court of justice on
several occasions.

.

The dissemination of copyright-protected content on the
Internet-e.g. by a music streaming service, or by an online
e-book seller-therefore requires, in principle, an
authorisation for each national territory in which the content
is communicated to the public. Rightholders are, of course, in
a position to grant a multi-territorial or pan-European
licence, such that content services canbe provided in several
Member States and across borders. A number of steps have been
taken atEUlevel to facilitate multi-territorial licences: the
proposal for a Directive on Collective Rights Management2

Proposal for a Directive ofthe European Parliament and of the
Council of11July2012on collective management of copyright and
related rights and multi-territorial licensing of rights in
musical works for online uses in the internal market,
COM(2012)372final.

should significantly facilitate the delivery ofmulti-

o

territorial licences in musical works for online services;the
structured stakeholder dialogue "Licences for Europe"3

You can find more information on the following
website:http://ec.europa.eu/licences-for-europe-dialogue/.

and market-led developments such as the on-going work in the
Linked Content Coalition4

You can find more information on the following
website:http://www.linkedcontentcoalition.org/.

.

"Licences for Europe"addressed in particular the specific issue
of cross-border portability, i.e. the ability of consumers
having subscribed to online services in their Member State to
keep accessing them when travelling temporarily to other Member
States. As a result, representatives of the audio-visual sector
issued a joint statement affirming their commitment to continue
working towards the further development of cross-border
portability5

See the document "Licences for Europe-templedges to bring more
content
online":http://ec.europa.eu/internalmarket/copYright/docs/licences-for-europe/131113
ten-pledges en.pdf.

.

Despite progress, there are continued problems with the
cross-border provision of, and access to, services. These
problems are most obvious to consumers wanting to access
services that are made available in Member States other than
the one in which they live. Not all online services
areavailable in all Member States and consumers face problems
when trying to access such services across borders. In some
instances, even if the "same" service is available in all
Member States, consumers cannot access the service across
borders (they can only access their "national" service, and if
they try to access the "same" service in another Member State
they are redirected to the one designated for their country of
residence).

This situation may in part stem from the territoriality of
rights and difficulties associated with the clearing of rights
in different territories. Contractual clauses in licensing
agreements between right holders and distributors and/or
between distributors and end users may also be at the origin of
some of the problems (denial of access, redirection).

The main issue at stake here is, therefore, whether further
measures (legislative ornon­,,  π

legislative, including market-led solutions) need to be taken
atEUlevel in the medium term toincrease the cross-border
availability of content services in the Single Market, while
ensuring an adequate level of protection for right holders.

[In particular if you are an end user/consumer:]Have you faced
problems when trying to access online services in anEUMember
State other than the one in which you live?

YES-Please provide examples indicating the Member State, the
sector and the type of content concerned (e.g. premium content
such as certain films and TV series, audio-visual content in
general, music, e-books, magazines, journals and newspapers,
games, applications and other software)

NO

NO OPINION

[In particular if you are a service provider:]Have you faced
problems when seeking to provide online services across borders
intheEU?

NO

[In particular if you are a right holder or a collective
management organisation:] How often are you asked to grant
multi-territorial licences? Please indicate,if possible, the
number of requests per year and provide examples indicating the
Member State, the sector and the type of content concerned.

NEVER.

4.If you have identified problems in the answers to any of the
questions above-what would be the best way to tackle them?

[In particular if you are a right holder or a collective
management organisation:] Are there reasons why, even in cases
where you hold all the necessary rights for all the territories
in question, you would still find it necessary or justified to
impose territorial restrictionson a service provider(in order,
for instance, to ensure that access to certain content is not
possible in certain European countries)?

YES

Our association represents writers and our reprographic rights
are defended byCEDROwho has limitations on the basis of
territoriality.CEDROwould respect such limitation of the
mandate.

Rights administration by Reprographic Rights Organizations,
(hereinafter RROs) of certain secondary uses of already
published works is often supported by national legislation.
This could take the form of a legal licence, a remuneration
right, or the extension of licensing agreementsconcluded on the
basis of exclusive rights to include works of non-mandating
authors and publishers. Such extension by law is in most cases
limited to national territories, the exception being the
licensing of the use of orphan works, which may be extended to
cover all EU Member States.

[In particular if you are e.g.a broadcaster or a service
provider:]Are there reasons why, even in cases where you have
acquired allthenecessary rights for alltheterritories in
question, you would still find it necessary or justified to
impose territorial restrictions on the service recipient (in
order for instance, to redirect the consumer to a different
website than the one he is trying to access)?

YES-Please explain by giving examples

NO

NO OPINION

Do you think that further measures(legislative or
non-legislative, including market- ledsolutions)are needed at
EU level to increasethecross-border availability of content
services in the Single Market, while ensuring an adequate level
of protection for right holders?

NO

In the text and image sector, current legislation is of no
hindrance to the development of multi-territorial solutions.
This is also confirmed in documents from the European
Commission (EC)8. Commercial users can generally ask for
permission to use awork directly from the publisher or author
and obtain it on a contractual and up to worldwide basis.
Equally, RROs are used to administering rights for secondary
uses across borders on the basis of different legislation and
models of RRO operation. Rightsfor foreign authors and
publishers are generally administered through the network of
bilateral agreements between

RROs. The IFRRO-recommended Repertoire Exchange Mandate (REM)
for digital licensing by RROs9 does not impose any territorial
limitations.

As noted by theEUAdvocate General EleanorSharpstonin her Opinion
(case C-351/12)10, typically in theEU,CMOs operate (whether by
virtue of a statutory ordefacto monopoly) within the territory
of a single Member State and may be required to accept
asmembers any rightholder resident or established within that
State. In such cases, we monitor and grant licences to users
within the same Member State. A user may obtain a licence for a
repertoire managed by a CMO established in another Member State
by means of reciprocal arrangements between CMOs, each of them
acting on behalf of the other(s) within its own territory11.
The principle of copyright territoriality has also been
reconfirmed in the Court of Justice of the European Union's
(CJEU's) "Premier League" case (C-403/08)12.

B. Is there a need for more clarity as regardsthescope of what
needs to be authorised(or not)in digital transmissions?

[The definition of the rights involved in digital transmissions]

TheEUframework for the protectionof copyright and related rights
in the digital

13

environment is largely established by Directive 2001/29/EC on
theharmonisationof certain aspects of copyright and related
rights in the information society. OtherEUdirectives in this
field that are relevant in the online environment are those
relating to the protection of software6

Directive 2009/24/EC of the European Parliament and of the
Council of23April2009on the legal protection of computer
programs.

and databases7

Directive 96/9/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council
of11March1996on the legal protection of databases.

.

Directive 2001/29/EC harmonises the rights of authors and
neighbouring rightholders8

Film and record producers,performers and broadcasters are
holders of so-called "neighbouring rights" in, respectively,
their films, records, performances and broadcast. Authors'
content protected by copyright is referred to as a "work" or
"works", while content protected by neighbouring rights is
referred to as "other subject matter".

which areessential for the transmission of digital copies of
works (e.g. an e-book) and other protected subject matter (e.g.
a record in a MP3 format) over the internet or similar digital
networks.

The most relevant rights for digital transmissions are the
reproduction right, i.e. the right to

λΠ

authorise or prohibit the making of copies,(notably relevant at
the start of the transmission-e.g. the uploading of a digital
copy ofa work to a server in view of making it available-and at
the users' end-e.g. when a user downloads a digital copy of a
work) and the communication to the public/making available
right, i.e. the rights to authorise or prohibit the

10

dissemination of the works in digital networks.These rights are
intrinsically linked in digital transmissions and both need to
be cleared.

[-- Image: Text Box 3 --]

1.

The act of "making available"

Directive 2001/29/EC specifies neitherwhatis covered by the
making availableright (e.g. the upload, the accessibility by
the public, the actual reception by the public) norwherethe act
of "making available" takes place. This does not raise questions
if the act is limited to a single territory. Questions arise
however when the transmission covers several territories and
rights need to be cleared (does the act of "making available"
happen in the country of the upload only? in each of the
countries where the content is potentially accessible? in each
of the countries where the content is effectively accessed?).
The most recent case law of the Court of Justice of the
EuropeanUnion(CJEU) suggests that a relevant criterion is the
"targeting" of a certain Member State's public9

See in particular Case C-173/11 (Football Dataco
vsSportradar)and Case C-5/11(Donner)for copyright and related
rights, and Case C-324/09(L'Oréalvs eBay) for trademarks. With
regard to jurisdiction see also joined Cases C-585/08 and
C-144/09 (Pammer and HotelAlpenhof)and pending
CaseC-441/13(PezHejduk);see however, adopting a different
approach, Case C-170/12 (Pinckney vs KDGMediatech).

. According to this approach the copyright-relevant act (which
has to be licensed) occurs at least in those countries which
are "targeted" by the online serviceprovider. A service
provider "targets" a group of customers residing in a specific
country when it directs its activity to that group, e.g. via
advertisement, promotions, a language or a currency
specifically targeted at that group.

Is the scope of the"making available" right in cross-border
situations— i.e.when content is disseminated across
borders—sufficiently clear?

NO

We consider that clarity is required as to what constitutes a
copyright relevant act and where it is produced (whether the
country of destination or country of origin principle should
apply to the making available right).

[In particular if you are a right holder:] Could a clarification
of the territorial scope of the "making available" right have an
effect on the recognition of your rights (e.g. whether you are
considered to be an author or not, whether you are considered
to have transferred your rights or not), on your remuneration,
or on the enforcement of rights (including the availability of
injunctive relief0)?

YES

We consider that the determination of the territorial scope of
the right of making available will produce an evident effect on
the enforcement of this right,in order to avoid the need to take
legal action in every territory in which the work is made
accessible to recover the damage caused by an online
infringement.

2.Two rights involved in a single act of exploitation

Each act of transmission in digital networks entails (in the
current state of technology and law) several reproductions.
This means that there are two rights that apply to digital
transmissions: the reproduction right and the making available
right. This may complicate the licensing of works foronline use
notably when the two rights are held by different
persons/entities.

10.[In particular if you a service provider or a right holder:]
Does the application of two rights to a single act of economic
exploitation in the online environment (e.g. a download) create
problems for you?

NO OPINION

3.Linking and browsing

Hyperlinks are references to data that lead a user from one
location in the Internet to another. They are indispensable for
the functioning of the Internetas a network. Several cases are

21

pending before the CJEU in which the question has been raised
whether the provision of a clickable link constitutes an act of
communication to the public/making available to the public
subject to the authorisation of therightholder.

A user browsing the internet (e.g. viewing a web-page) regularly
creates temporary copies of works and other subject-matter
protected under copyright on the screen and in the 'cache'

22

memory of his computer. A question has been referred tothe CJEU
as to whether such copies are always covered by the mandatory
exception for temporary acts of reproduction provided for in
Article5(1)of Directive 2001/29/EC.

11.Should the provisionof a hyperlink leading to awork or other
subject matter protected under copyright, either in general or
under specific circumstances, be subject totheauthorisation
oftherightholder?

YES,under specific circumstances

Hyperlinks are essential tools for online content delivery
andform a part of the communication process. Specifically,
where a hyperlink is comprised of or includes text protected as
the whole or part of a copyright work (see The Newspaper
Licensing Agency Ltd&OrsvMeltwater Holding BV&Ors[2011]EWCACiv
890),the 'provision' of a hyperlink would involve the
reproduction of the whole or part of a copyright work. In such
circumstances, the authorisation of the rights-holder would be
appropriate. This is especially relevant to the provision of
paid-for services tobusiness users, which would otherwise
substitute for services which currently generate important
income streams for content owners.

We understand the purpose of the question as being that of
providing relevant user access to copyright works. There are
licensing mechanisms in place to enable legal user access, so
there is no reason to exempt the act of hyperlinking to a
copyright work or other subject matter from the requirement of
rightsholder authorisation. This view was also held by
theDistrict Court of The Hague when it ruled in the case of
Buma/Stemra against the operator of radio streaming websites
'Nederland.fm' and 'Op.fm', that a website, which is embedding
or linking to radio-streams without a licence, infringes
copyright23.

Nevertheless, not all linking should necessarily be made subject
to authorisation. There might be an implied licence to link in a
loyal manner to other websites, as long as the material that is
being linked to has been made available with the consent of the
copyright holder.

12.Should the viewing of a web-page where this implies the
temporary reproduction of a work or other subject matter
protected under copyright on the screen and in the cache memory
of the user's computer, either in general or under
specificcircumstances, be subject totheauthorisation
oftherightholder?

YES,under specific circumstances

Reproductions that are both temporary and incidental should not
require additional consent from the copyright holder. This does
not mean that all "cache" memory copies are to be considered
"temporary" or strictly "incidental" ones.

Technological development has had the effect that copyright
content is increasingly viewed or listened to ("streamed")
through computer browsers rather than by the making of
downloaded copies. The increasing use of streaming is
documented, for example, in a report prepared for Ofcom24,
which tracked digital behaviours and attitudes among persons
aged12+,in the United Kingdom. Thereport noted that the
incidence of streaming of TV programmes was much more common
than downloading(33%for streaming, compared to9%for
downloading). Streaming services are one variety of "on-demand"
service, which is specifically referred to in Recital10to
Directive 2001/29/EC as requiring protection.

It would not be compatible with common sense of justice that
essentially the same act-making a copy of the monitoring report
for the purpose of reading its content-should not require a
licence in one case (when accessed online), while it does in
the other (when accessed by e-mail). If viewing and streaming
were not subject to rightholder authorisation, this anomaly
would exist in the online environment generally, where the
problem of piracy is notorious.

Accessing the same content by the easy alternative of visiting
the website of an unlicensed website (claiming to avoid the
payment of a licence fee) obviously conflicts with the normal
exploitation of the works and unreasonably prejudices the
legitimate interests of the copyright holders, thereby
infringing the three-step test in international conventions
that theEUMember States are party to, as well as Article5(5)of
European Union Copyright Directive (EUCD). The computer user
deliberately createsa copy of the work on his computer screen.
It is his very purpose in opening his browser and going
toawebpagefor a book or article, and/or streaming a sound
recording or film. The end user must therefore be obliged to
obtain a licence to access the underlying work. This does not
prevent a user from reading, viewing or listening to content
that has been made legaly available on the web with the consent
of the copyright holder. Any further use is, however, subject to
authorisation or licensing.

4.Downloadto own digital content

Digital content is increasingly being bought via digital
transmission (e.g. download to own). Questions arise as to the
possibility for users to dispose of the files they buy in this
manner (e.g. by selling them or by giving them asa gift). The
principle ofEUexhaustion of the distribution right applies in
the case of the distribution of physical copies (e.g. when a
tangible article such as a CD or a book, etc. is sold, the
right holder cannot prevent the further distribution of that
tangible article)10

See also recital28of Directive 2001/29/EC.

. The issue that arises here is whether this principle can also
be applied in the case of an act of transmission equivalent in
its effect to distribution

(i.e. where the buyer acquiresthe property of the copy)11

In Case C-128/11 (Oracle vs. UsedSoft) the CJEU ruled that an
author cannot oppose the resale of a second­hand licence that
allows downloading his computer program from his website and
using it for an unlimited period of time.The exclusive right of
distribution of a copy of a computer program covered by such a
licence is exhausted on its first sale. While it is thus
admitted that the distribution right may be subject to
exhaustion in case of computer programs offered for download
with the right holder's consent, the Court was careful to
emphasise that it reached this decision based on the Computer
Programs Directive. It was stressed that this exhaustion rule
constitutedalex specialisin relation to the Information Society
Directive (UsedSoft, par.51, 56).

. This raises difficult questions, notably relating to the
practical application of such an approach (how to avoid
re-sellers keeping and using a copy of a work after they have
"re-sold" it-this is often referred to as the"forward and
delete" question) as well as to the economic implications of
the creation of a second-hand market of copiesof perfect
quality that never deteriorate (in contrast to the second-hand
market for physical goods).

[In particular if you are anend user/consumer:] Have you faced
restrictions when trying to resell digital files that you have
purchased (e.g. mp3 file, e-book)?

YES-Please explain by giving examples

NO

NO OPINION

[In particular if you are a rightholder or a service provider:]
What would be the consequences of providing a legal framework
enabling the resale of previously purchased digital content?
Please specify per market (type of content) concerned.

Bearing in mind that a digitaltransmission requires the copy of
the work and the reproduction right is involved in such
transmission, we consider that there is a need to be
established that, since there is no physical storage to possess
and the transferred file would be fixed on a different storage,
the first sale doctrine (principle of exhaustion) doesn't apply
to digital files. An important consequence of enabling the
resale of digital content would be that the rightsholders
couldn't ensure or prevent that the reseller doesn't retainthe
transferred file or transfer it to a plurality of transferees.
Consequently, such an extension would be an invitation to
infringement.

Moreover, since digital files are perfect copies, resellers will
compete with content retail industries forcing prices down.

Large scale digital retailers, Apple and Amazon, have both
obtained patents for systems of resale for digital items27,
which indicates that these retailers may be thinking about
setting up their own marketplace or lending library for the
transferof user-owned digital content. These marketplaces
should allow original content creators to benefit from the
resale of their goods and implement mechanisms to prevent
people from making digital copies of their purchased files and
selling those again, otherwise reduced earnings prospects could
seriously reduce the creators' incentive to create.

The ownership of digital files and the possibility of their
resale are linked to the application of the principle of
exhaustion to the distribution of tangible copiesof works. The
answer provided by CJEU's case law in the Oracle vs. UsedSoft
decision, Case C-128/1128, is limited only to the specific case
of software.

According to the German Regional Court of Bielefeld, the CJEU's
UsedSoft decision is not applicable tothe resale of other
digital content.29 More specifically, the German court held
that, because of the nature of the Software Directive
2009/24/EC aslex specialisto Directive 2001/29/EC, the
reasoning in UsedSoft could not be applied to other
subject-matter. In this vein, theLandgerichtBielefeld concluded
that the EUCD does not permit the application of the principle
of exhaustion to works in non-analogue form.

Registration of works and other subject matter—is it a good
idea?

Registration is not often discussed in copyright in theEUas the
existing international treaties in the area prohibit
formalities as a condition for the protection and exercise of
rights.

30

However, this prohibition is not absolute.Moreover a system of
registrationdoes not need to be made compulsory or constitute a
precondition for the protection and exercise of rights. With a
longer term of protection and with the increased opportunities
that digital technology provides for the use of content
(including older works and works that otherwise would not have
been disseminated), the advantages and disadvantages of a
system of registration are

•  31

increasingly being considered.

Would the creation of a registration system atEUlevel help in
the identificationand licensing of works and other subject
matter?

NO OPINION

What would be the possible advantages of such a system?

Under current international copyright legislation, registration
cannot be made compulsory or constitute a precondition for the
protection and exercise of rights. Possible advantages of
registration, provided it is established on a voluntary basis,
include the identification and proof of rights and the
facilitation of copyright licensing. However, authors and
publishers cannot be required or expected to monitor
notifications in theEUand its Member States.

What would be the possible disadvantages of such a system?

[Open question]

What incentives for registration by rightholders could be
envisaged?

[Open question]

How to improvetheuse and interoperability of identifiers

There are many private databases of works and other subject
matter held by producers, collective management organisations,
and institutions such as libraries, which are based toa greater
or lesser extent on the use of (more or less) interoperable,
internationally agreed 'identifiers'. Identifiers can be
compared to a reference number embedded in a work, are

32

specific to the sector in which they have been developed,and
identify, variously, the work itself, the owner or the
contributor to a work or other subject matter. There are
notable examples of where industry is undertaking actions to
improve the interoperability of such

identifiers and databases. The Global Repertoire Database
should, once operational, provide a single source of
information on the ownership and control of musical works
worldwide. The Linked Content Coalition12

You will find more information about this initiative (funded in
part by the European Commission) on the following
website:www.linkedcontentcoalition.org.

was established to develop building blocks forthe expression and
management of rights and licensing across all content and media
types. It includes the development of a Rights Reference Model
(RRM)-a comprehensive data model for all types

35

of rights in all types of content. The UK Copyright Hub is
seeking to take such identification systems a step further, and
to create a linked platform, enabling automated licensing across

different sectors.

19.What should be the role of theEUin promoting the adoption
ofidentifiers in the content sector, and in
promotingthedevelopment and interoperability of rights
ownership and permissions databases?

Identifiers are crucial for the efficiency and transparency of
CMO operations. EC-sponsored projects such as ARROW andARROW
Plus include references to the desirability of using
international identifier standards such as ISNI (International
Standard Name Identifier, ISO27729)and ISTC (International
Standard text Code, ISO21047).This could be facilitated by the
transposition of ISO21047and ISO27729into European standards.

EC support could also be given for projects to populate vital
databases being used byEUProjects with agreed
internationalstandards. In particular the TEL (The European
Library) database, used also for the ARROW project, could be
funded to acquire ISNIs and ISTCs, for the free use also by
other databases, such as those of CMOs and Books in Print.
There is a need for CMOs tobe able to use such standards to
optimise their distribution activities, as required under
theEUCRM Directive. A feasibility study is desirable to see how
the international standards ISNI and ISTC can be interfaced with
the private databases of the CMOs,for instance, in the text and
data field, so that distribution of revenue can be better
automated. Such a study could be financed, totally or
partially, by the European Commission.

E.Term of protection—is it appropriate?

Works and other subject matterare protected under copyright for
a limited period of time. After the term of protection has
expired, a work falls into the public domain and can be freely
used by anyone (in accordance with the applicable national
rules on moral rights). The Berne Convention13

Berne Convention for the Protection of Literary and Artistic
Works,http://www.wipo.int/treaties/en/ip/berne/.

requires a minimum term of protection of50years after the death
of theauthor. TheEUrules extend this term of protection
to70years after the death of the author (as do many other
countries, e.g. the US).

With regard to performers in the music sector and phonogram
producers, the term provided for in theEUrules also
extend20years beyond what is mandated in international
agreements, providing for a term of protection of70years after
the first publication. Performers and producers in the
audio-visual sector, however, do not benefit from such an
extended term of protection.

20.^re the current termsof copyright protection still
appropriate in the digital environment?

YES

Whether the environment is digital or analogue is irrelevant to
the question of term ofprotectionand we believe that the
currentterm of copyright protection is appropriate.

II.Limitations and exceptions in the Single Market

Limitations and exceptions to copyright and related rights
enable the use of works and otherprotected subject-matter,
without obtaining authorisationfrom the rightholders, for
certain purposes and to a certain extent (for instance the use
for illustration purposes of an extract from a novel by a
teacher in a literature class). AtEUlevel they are established
in a number of copyright directives, mostnotably Directive
2001/29/EC14

Plus Directive 96/9/EC on the legal protection of databases;
Directive 2009/24/EC on the legal protection of computer
programs, and Directive 92/100/EC on rental right and lending
right.

.

Exceptions and limitationsin the national andEUcopyright laws
have to respect international

38

law.In accordance with international obligations, theEUacquis
requires that limitations and exceptions can only be applied in
certain special cases which do not conflict with a normal
exploitation of the work or other subject matter and do not
unreasonably prejudice the legitimate interest of the
rightholders.

Whereas the catalogue of limitations and exceptions included
inEUlaw is exhaustive (no

39

other exceptions can be appliedto the rights harmonised
atEUlevel),these limitations and exceptions are often
optional15

With the exception of certain limitations: (i) in the Computer
Programs Directive, (ii) in the Database
Directive,(iii)Article5(1)in the Directive 2001/29/ECand(iv)the
Orphan Works Directive.

, in the sense that Member States are free to reflect in
national legislation as many or as few of them as they wish.
Moreover, the formulation of certain of the limitations and
exceptions is general enough to give significant flexibility to
the Member States as to how, and to what extent, to implement
them (if they decide to do so). Finally, it is worth noting
that not all of the limitations and exceptions included in
theEUlegal framework for copyright are of equivalent
significance in policy terms and in terms of their potential
effect on the functioning of the Single Market.

In addition, in the same manner that the definition of the
rights is territorial (i.e. has an effect only within the
territory of the Member State), the definition of the
limitations and exceptions to the rights is territorial too (so
an act that is covered by an exception in a Member State "A" may
still require the authorisation of the rightholder once we move
to the Member State "B")16

Only the exception established in the recent Orphan Works
Directive (a mandatory exception to copyright and related
rights in the case where the rightholders are not known or
cannot be located) has been given across­bordereffect, which
means that, for instance, once a literary work-for instance a
novel-is considered an orphan work in a Member State, that same
novel shall be considered an orphan work in all Member States
and can be used and accessed in all Member States.

Should any new limitationsand exceptions be added to or removed
from the existing catalogue? Please explain by referring to
specific cases.

Rather than considering whether to remove or add to the current
exceptions and limitations focus should be on the harmonization
and clarification of the existing ones.

Independently from the questions above, is there a need to
provide for a greater degree offlexibility in theEUregulatory
framework for limitations and exceptions?

X NO

If yes, what would be the bestapproach to provide for
flexibility? (e.g. interpretation by national courts andtheECJ,
periodic revisions ofthedirectives, interpretations by the
Commission, built-in flexibility, e.g. in the form of a
fair-use or fair dealing provision/open norm,etc.)? Please
explain indicating what would betherelative advantages and

.

The cross-border effect of limitations and exceptions also
raises the question of fair compensation of rightholders. In
some instances, Member Statesare obliged to compensate
rightholders for the harm inflicted on them by a limitation or
exception to their rights. In other instances Member States
arenot obliged, but may decide, to provide for such
compensation.

If a limitation or exception triggeringa mechanism of fair
compensation were to be given cross-border effect (e.g. the
books are used for illustration in an online course given by an
university in a Member State "A" and the students are in a
Member State "B") then there would also be a need toclarify
which national law should determine the level of that
compensation and who should pay it.

Finally, the question of flexibility and adaptability is being
raised: what is the best mechanism to ensure that theEUand
Member States' regulatory frameworks adapt when necessary
(either to clarify that certain uses are covered by an
exception or to confirm that for certain uses the authorisation
of rightholders is required)? The main question here is whether
a greater degree of flexibility can be introduced in theEUand
Member States regulatory framework while ensuring the required
legal certainty, including for the functioning of the Single
Market, and respecting theEU'sinternational obligations.

Are there problems arising from the fact that most limitations
and exceptions provided in theEUcopyright directives are
optional for the Member States?

YES

Should some/all of the exceptions be made mandatory and, if so,
is there a need for a higher level ofharmonisationof such
exceptions?

YES

Weare of the opinion that flexibility is important to ensure
that the copyright framework is fit to the need of the
individual Member State. Nevertheless, we consider that, in
some cases, more mandatory exceptions will minimize differences
and eliminate discrimination among citizens of theEUmember
states (users and rightholders). Harmonization will also
reinforce authors' rights across European States and will
ensure certainty for users and beneficiaries of the exception.

Finally, as part of the copyright incentive scheme we advocate
for the implementation of harmonized compensation schemes in
order to avoid differences and discrimination among citizens of
theEU.

disadvantages of such an approach as well as its possible
effects on the functioning of theInternal Market.

[Open question]

26.Does the territoriality of limitations and exceptions, in
your experience, constitute aproblem?

XYES

As stated above, we consider that the harmonization and
clarification of the territorial scope of certain limitations
is necessary. The territoriality of limitations and exceptions
implies that an act that is covered by an exception in one
member state maynot be covered by such exception in another
member state, also the same act can be subject of a compensated
limitation in one member state and subject of a non-compensated
limitation in another member state. Therefore, a higher level
of harmonization of limitations and exceptions is required.

In this regard, we need to mention the new private copying
compensation system introduced in Spain where the amount of the
compensation for private copying depends on some pre­existing
amounts allocated in the National Budget and not on the actual
damage caused to the rightholders. The consequence of this new
system is that Spanish rightholders and foreign rightholders in
Spain do not receive adequate remuneration for their creative
activity while in other countries anadequate compensation is
recognized.

27.In the event that limitations and exceptions established at
national level were to have cross-border effect, how should the
question of "fair compensation"be addressed, when such
compensation is part of the exception? (e.g. who pays whom,
where?)

With respect to rights administered by RROs remuneration must be
paid by the organism that signs the agreement with/is authorised
by the RRO, and the remuneration should be collected by the RRO
granting the authorisation or collecting the compensation. In
cases of cross-border uses, the question of fair remuneration
may raise difficult questions in this period of public deficits
and, in particular, for the big linguistic areas.

A.Accessto content in libraries and archives

Directive 2001/29/EC enables Member States to reflect in their
national law a range of limitations and exceptions for the
benefit of publicly accessible libraries, educational
establishments and museums, as well as archives. If
implemented, these exceptions allow acts

42

of preservation and archiving and enable on-site consultation of
the works and other subject matter in the collections of such
institutions17

Article 5(3)n of Directive2001/29.

. The public lending (under an exception orlimitation)by these
establishments of physical copies of works and other subject
matter is governed bytheRental and Lending Directive18

Article5of Directive 2006/115/EC.

.

Questions arise as to whether the current framework continues to
achieve the objectives envisaged or whether it needs to be
clarified or updated to cover use in digital networks. At the
same time,questions arise as to the effect of such a possible
expansion on the normal exploitation of works and other subject
matter and as to the prejudice this may cause to rightholders.
The role of licensing and possible framework agreements between
different stakeholders also needs to be considered here.

1.Preservation and archiving

The preservation of the copies of works or other subject-matter
held in thecollections of cultural establishments (e.g. books,
records, or films)-the restoration or replacement of works, the
copying of fragile works-may involve the creation of another
copy/ies of these works or other subject matter. Most Member
States providefor an exception in their national laws allowing
for the making of such preservation copies. The scope of the
exception differs from Member State to Member State (as regards
the type of beneficiary establishments, the types of
works/subject-matter coveredby the exception, the mode of
copying and the number of reproductions that a beneficiary
establishment may make). Also, the current legal status of new
types of preservation activities (e.g. harvesting and archiving
publicly available web content) is often uncertain.

(a) [In particular if you are an institutional user:] Have you
experienced specific problems when trying to use an exception
to preserve and archive specific works or other subject matter
in your collection?

(b)[In particular if you are a right holder:]Have you
experienced problems with the use by libraries, educational
establishments, museum or archives of the preservation
exception?

X NO

If there are problems, how wouldthey best be solved?

[Open question]

If your view is that a legislative solution is needed, what
would be its main elements? Which activities of the beneficiary
institutions should be covered and under which conditions?

[Open question]

If your view is that a different solution is needed, what would
it be?

[Open question]

2.Off-premises access to library collections

Directive 2001/29/EC provides an exception for the consultation
of works and other subject- matter (consulting an e-book,
watching adocumentary)viadedicated terminals on the premises of
such establishments for the purpose of research and private
study. The online consultation of works and other
subject-matter remotely (i.e. when the library user is not on
the premises of the library) requires authorisation and is
generally addressed in agreements

between universities/libraries and publishers. Some argue that
the law rather than agreements should provide for the
possibility to, and the conditions for, granting online access
tocollections.

(a) [In particular if you are an institutional user:] Have you
experienced specific problems when trying to negotiate
agreements with rights holders that enable you to provide
remote access, including across borders, to your collections
(or parts thereof) for purposes of research and private study?

[In particular if you are an end user/consumer:] Have you
experienced specific problems when trying to consult, including
across borders, works and other subject-matter held
inthecollections of institutions such as universities and
national libraries when you are not on the premises of the
institutions in question?

[In particular if you are a right holder:] Have you negotiated
agreements with institutional users that enable those
institutions to provide remote access, including across
borders, to the works or other subject-matter in their
collections, for purposes of research and private study?

X NO

If there are problems, how would they best be solved?

In general, problems are best solved through stakeholder
dialogues. Organisations representing libraries, archives,
authors, publishers and CMOs have a proven track record in
developing solutions for libraries and archives through
stakeholder dialogues. Examples45 are principles for rights
clearance and registries of orphan works and out-of-commerce
works; model licensing agreements for the making available of
out-of-commerce works in closed and open networks; the
Memorandum of Understanding on Key Principles on the
Digitization and Making Available of Out-of-Commerce Works by
libraries; and the development and deployment of ARROW to
facilitate and reduce costs in rights information management46.

[If your view is that a legislative solution is needed, what
would be its main elements? Which activities of the beneficiary
institutions should be covered and under which conditions?

[Open question]

If your view is that a different solution is needed, what would
it be?

[Open question]

3.E-lending

Traditionally, public libraries have loaned physical copies of
works (i.e. books, sometimes also CDs and DVDs) to their users.
Recent technological developments have made it technically
possible for libraries to provide users with temporary access
to digital content, such as e-books, music or films via
networks. Under the current legal framework, libraries need to
obtain the authorisation of the rights holders to organise such
e-lending activities. In various Member States, publishers
andlibraries are currently experimenting with different
business models for the making available of works online,
including direct supply of e-books to libraries by publishers
or bundling by aggregators.

36.(a) [In particular if you are a library:] Have youexperienced
specific problems when trying to negotiate agreements to enable
the electronic lending (e-lending), including across borders,
of books or other materials held in your collection?

[In particular if you are an end user/consumer:] Have you
experienced specific problems when trying to borrow books or
other materials electronically (e-lending), including across
borders, from institutions such as public libraries?

[In particular if you are a rightholder:] Have you negotiated
agreements with libraries to enable them to lend books or other
materials electronically, including across borders?

XNO

According to Spanish Intellectual Property Act the distribution
right shall be construed as themaking available to the public
of the original or of copies of the work,in a tangible
support,by means of sale, rental or lending or any other
manner.

Therefore, e-lending in Spain is not covered by law. This new
business model should be based on licenses to deliver content
between the libraries and the rightholders or its
representatives.

If there are problems, how would they best be solved?

[In particular if you are an institutional user:] What
differences do you see in the management of physical and online
collections, including providing access to your subscribers?
What problems have you encountered?

[Open question]

[In particular if you are a right holder:] What difference do
you see between libraries' traditional activities such as
on-premises consultation or public lending and activities such
as off-premises (online, at a distance) consultation and
e-lending? What problems have you encountered?

E-lending is a part of thepublishers' business model. As selling
access to copyright works, rather than physical copies, is an
essential part of the business model in the digital
environment, in particular in trade-book publishing, library
e-lending will more easily conflict withthe normal exploitation
of the work and unreasonably prejudice the legitimate interest
of the rightholder and could jeopardize the development of the
digital book market.

E-lending can take place on the basis of contractual agreements
between copyright holders or their representatives and
libraries.

One should alsonotethat the e-book market is only at a nascent
stage, and that sales to consumers represent the majority of
the trade-book market.

4.Mass digitisation

The term "mass digitisation" is normallyused to refer to efforts
by institutions such as libraries and archives to digitise (e.g.
scan) the entire content or part of their collections with an
objective to preserve these collections and, normally, to make
them available to the public. Examples are efforts by libraries
to digitise novels form the early part of the 20thcentury or
whole collections of pictures of historical value. This matter
has been partly addressed at theEUlevel by the2011Memorandum of
Understanding(MoU) on key principles on the digitisation and
making available of out of commerce works (i.e. works which are
no longer found in the normal channels of commerce), which is
aiming to facilitate mass digitisation efforts (for books and
learned journals) on the basis of licence agreements between
libraries

and similar cultural institutions on the one hand and the
collecting societies representing

лп

authors and publishers on the other19

ou will find more information about his MoU on the following
website:http://ec.europa.eu/internalmarket/copyriaht/out-oF-commerce/index
en.htm.

. Provided the required fundingis ensured (digitisation projects
are extremely expensive), the result of this MoU should be that
books that are currently to be found only in the archives of,
for instance, libraries will be digitised and made available
online to everyone. The MoU is based on voluntary licences
(granted by Collective Management Organisations on the basis of
the mandates they receive from authors and publishers). Some
Member States may need to enact legislation to ensure the
largest possible effect of such licences (e.g. by establishing
in legislation a presumption of representation of

48

a collecting society or the recognition of an "extended effect"
to the licences granted).

[Inparticular if you are an institutional user, engaging or
wanting to engage in mass digitisation projects, a right
holder, a collective management organisation:] Would it be
necessary in your country to enact legislation to ensure that
the results of the2011MoU(i.e.the agreements concluded between
libraries and collecting societies) have across­bordereffect so
that out of commerce works can be accessed acrosstheEU?

Would it be necessary to develop mechanisms, beyond those
already agreed for other types of content (e.g. for audio- or
audio-visual collections, broadcasters' archives)?

XNO OPINION

B. Teaching

Directive 2001/29/EC20

Article 5(3)a of Directive2001/29.

enables Member States to implementin their national legislation
limitations and exceptions for the purpose of illustration for
non-commercial teaching. Such exceptions would typically allow
a teacher to use parts of or full works to illustrate his
course, e.g. by distributing copies of fragments of a book or
of newspaper articles in the classroom or by showing protected
content on a smart board without having to obtain authorisation
from the right holders. The open formulation of this (optional)
provision allows for rather different implementation at Member
States level. The implementation of the exception differs from
Member State to Member State, with several Member States
providing instead a framework for the licensing of content for
certain educational uses. Some argue that the law should
provide for better possibilities for distance learning and
study at home.

42.(a) [In particular if you are an end user/consumer or an
institutional user:] Have you experienced specific problems
when trying to use works or other subject-matter for
illustration for teaching, including across borders?

(b) [In particular if you are a right holder:] Have you
experienced specific problems resulting from the way in which
works or other subject-matter are used for illustration for
teaching, including across borders?

XYES

The current concept of "illustration for teaching" in Spanish
Intellectual Property Act is very unclear and causes several
uncertainties to rightholders and beneficiaries of the
exception.

Sometimes, perhaps due to this reason, many educational
institutions have claimed that "illustration for teaching"
includes multiple copying and other forms of uses which, in
fact, need to be licensed, or made subject to remuneration. On
this basis, they refuse to take up a licence.

CEDROfinds it very difficult to convince teaching institutions
to sign a licence for the uses that they made and to verify
compliance of intellectual property laws by such institutions.

In the second half of2013Spanish courts ruled againsttwo Spanish
universities, ordering them to take up a licence withCEDROand
remove copies that they had made of copyright- protected
material. However, the illustration for teaching was not
invoked by the defendants in view of the fact that current
exception in Spain only covers face-to-face teaching not
digital copies an online education.

We understand the exception in Article 5(3)(a) as being a narrow
exception to the exclusive rights, aimed at enabling exactly
what it reads: to illustrate; which is farfrom being the same
as planned producing of teaching material. The underlying
rationale for the concept of "illustration for teaching" is to
cover minor acts of copying that does not conflict with a
normal exploitation of the work and does not
unreasonablyprejudice the legitimate interests of the
rightholders. This understanding of the concept is in
accordance with its wording as well as of the opinions
expressed by the foremost experts on it. Teaching material in
whatever format, including multiple copying for classroom use,
cannot and is not destined to be made under this exception, as
it would definitely undermine the normal exploitation of these
works.

Nevertheless, the Spanish current exception is going to be
amended, since a draft bill on the partialreform of the
Intellectual Property Act is in the process of being adopted.
The new text doesn't solve the problem and establishes a tricky
limit in which the payment of an equitable remuneration and the
volume that can be reproduced depends on the type ofwork and
the type of educational institution and the use of the copy.

If there are problems, how would they best be solved?

Clarification on both Community and national levels that
"illustration for teaching" does not comprise the reproduction,
making available and distribution of copyrighted works, such as
in the form of arranged, planned or structured multiple copies
for classroom use, compilations, e-reserves and the sort would
be appropriate. Such access to works is offered by authors and
publishers directly, or through rights administration by RROs
and other CMOs.

The exception should cover all kinds of books, journals and
magazines without distinction even though certain categories of
works could be excluded, and be subject of an equitable
remuneration for authors and publishers. Moreover, a
supervisory power should be conferred to the CMOs in order to
verify compliance with the license terms by educational
institutions and if the uses of copyrighted material made by
such institutionsarereally covered by the exception.

What mechanisms exist inthemarket place to facilitatetheuse of
content for illustration for teaching purposes? How successful
are they?

CEDROoffers legal uses of copyright works that complements
licensing by authors and publishers. Collective schemes
administered byCEDROinclude scanning of books, journals,
magazines, etc. and copying from electronic carriers for a
variety of uses, including for the

printing out of a hard copy, posting to internal networks
accessible to authorised users specified in thelicence,and
other relevant uses.

A relevant example of a pioneer tool offered byCEDROto legally
use works of our repertoire iswww.conlicencia.coman online
platform that enables secondary uses of more than20million
books, journals, magazines, newspapers and sheet music
published in more than30countries thatCEDROholds in its
repertoire.50.

If your view is that a legislative solution is needed, what
would be itsmain elements? Which activities of the beneficiary
institutions should be covered and under what conditions?

As wementioned in questions42and43the main elements, among
others, needed in the exception of "illustration for teaching"
are:

-The uses should belimitedto non relevant excerpts.

-The exception should apply to all kinds of books, magazines and
journals, even though

some kind of works could be excluded.

-Limited to both university andpre-universitylevels.

-A supervisory power should be conferred to the CMOs.

-An equitable remuneration should be paid to authors and
publishers.

If yourview isthat a different solution is needed, what would it
be?

The preferred option is toencourage solutions and to protect
market-based offers by ensuring that: any limitation for the
benefit of teaching is limited to small parts; copies made
under the limitation remain in the hands of the teacher;
rightholders are named and receive fair remuneration; certain
categories of works can be excluded from the limitation or
exception; educational material is promoted as crucial to a
sound education, providing cultural vitality and economic
prosperity; interoperability is an important criterion
whenproviding for e-reading possibilities and/or e-reading
material in education.

The EC's andEUMember State's support, as required by national
legal traditions and requirements, to individual and collective
rights management schemes would be appropriate andwelcome.
Entering into individual and collective licensing schemes
offered to educational establishments by rightholders and RROs
is what provides the broadest and most adequate legal access to
intellectual property to the teaching and research communities.
In a fast changing world, where technologies move with an
unprecedented speed, regulations do not have the ability to
offer the required flexibility. Licensing agreements do. They
offer comprehensive tailor-made solutions to access scientific
and literary works to meet the needs of educational
institutions. This is the safest, simplest, fastest, most
innovative, most convenient and most cost efficient way to
seamless access to high quality teaching material from multiple
authors and publishers. What's more, flourishing local cultural
industries and a healthy educational system with broad access
to local resources contributes significantly to the nation's
economy and employment.

C. Research

Directive 2001/29/EC21

Article 5(3)a of Directive2001/29.

enables Member States to choose whether to implement in their
national laws a limitation for the purpose of non-commercial
scientific research. The open

formulationof this (optional) provision allows for rather
different implementations at Member Stateslevel.

(a) [In particular if you are an end user/consumer or an
institutional user:] Have you experienced specific problems
when trying to use works or other subject matter inthecontextof
research projects/activities, including across borders?

(b) [In particular if you are a right holder:] Have you
experienced specific problems resulting from the way in which
works or other subject-matter are used in the context of
research projects/activities, including across borders?

X NO

Even though, we have not experienced problems resulting from the
way in which works are used in the context of research
activities, the Spanish Intellectual Property Act includes a
wide exception that stipulates that the author's license shall
not be required for the communication of a work or making
available to specific persons for research purposes when
carried out through a closed an internal network via
specialized terminals installed for such purposes on the
premises of certain institutions and provided such works appear
in the institutions own collection and are not the object of
licensing and purchase conditions.

If there are problems, how would they best be solved?

An equitable remuneration shouldbe paid and the acts covered by
such exception should be clarified.

What mechanisms exist in the Member States to facilitate the use
of content for research purposes? How successful are they?

The use of copyright material for research purposes is commonly
comprised in the licences offered by publishers. Training
opportunities for teachers and professors regarding the
inclusion of digital content in the national curriculum, in
addition to support for public funding for academic libraries,
could be further promoted.

Certain uses of copyright works in conjunction with research are
licensed byCEDRO.As we have mentioned before,CEDROhas developed
the online platformwww.conlicencia.com

D. Disabilities

52

Directive 2001/29/EC provides for an exception/limitation for
the benefit of people with a disability. The open formulation
of this (optional) provision allows for rather different
implementations at Member States level. AtEUand international
level projects have been launched to increase the accessibility
of works and other subject-matter for persons with disabilities
(notably by increasing the number of works published in special
formats and facilitating their distribution across the European
Union)22

The European Trusted Intermediaries Network (ETIN) resulting
from a Memorandum of Understanding between representatives of
the right-holder community (publishers, authors, collecting
societies) and interested parties such as associations for
blind and dyslexic
persons(http://ec.europa.eu/internalmarket/copyright/initiatives/access/index
en.htm)and the Trusted IntermediaryGlobal Accessible
Resources(TIGAR)project
inWIPO(http://www.visionip.org/portal/en/).

.

The Marrakesh Treaty23

Marrakesh Treaty to Facilitate Access to Published Works by
Visually Impaired Persons and Persons with Print Disabilities,
Marrakesh, June17to28 2013.

has been adopted to facilitate access to published works for
persons who are blind, visually impaired, or otherwise print
disabled. The Treaty creates a mandatory exception to copyright
that allows organisations for the blind to produce, distribute
and make available accessible format copies to visually
impaired persons without the authorisation of the rightholders.
TheEUand its Member States have started work to sign and ratify
the Treaty. This may require the adoption of certain provisions
atEUlevel (e.g. to ensure the possibility to exchange accessible
format copies across borders).

(a) [In particular if you are a person with a disability or an
organisation representing persons with disabilities:] Have you
experienced problems withaccessibility to content, including
across borders, arising from Member States' implementation of
this exception?

[In particular if you are an organisation providing services for
persons with disabilities:] Have you experienced problems when
distributing/communicating works published in special formats
across theEU?

[In particular if you are a right holder:] Have you experienced
specific problems resulting fromtheapplication of limitations
or exceptions allowing forthedistribution/communication of
works published in special formats, including across borders?

X NO

If there are problems, what could be done to improve
accessibility?

Even though, we have not experiencedproblems related to the
exception/limitation for the benefit of people with a
disability, we consider thatthecross-border exchange of
accessible format copies permitted under article5
(1)ofMarrakechTreaty could involve a risk to rightholders who
will have to bear the first access of their works in certain
territories where they haven't introduce their works. In the
case of Spanish written books the likelihood of
loosingthecontrol over it destination is higher, since the
dissemination of Spanish language could increase the number of
exchanges in the whole of Spanish-speaking countries.

What mechanisms exist inthemarket place to facilitate
accessibility to content?Howsuccessful are they?

Publishers are increasingly publishing books in the e-Pub
format, which can be directly converted into files accessible
to persons who are print disabled.55 Those files can be sold to
users directly or to institutions serving the community of the
print disabled.

E. Text and data mining

Text and data mining/content mining/data analytics24

For the purpose of the present document, the term "text and data
mining" will be used.

are different terms used todescribe increasingly important
techniques used in particular by researchers for the
exploration of vast amounts of existing texts and data (e.g.,
journals, web sites, databases etc.). Through the use of
software or other automated processes, an analysisis made of
relevant texts and data in order to obtain new insights,
patterns and trends.

The texts and data used for mining are either freely accessible
on the internet or accessible through subscriptions to e.g.
journals and periodicals that give access to the databases of
publishers. A copy is made of the relevant texts and data (e.g.
on browser cache memories or in computers RAM memories or onto
the hard disk of a computer), prior to the actual analysis.
Normally, it is considered that to mine protectedworks or other
subject matter, it is necessary to obtain authorisation from the
right holders for the making of such copies unless such
authorisation can be implied (e.g. content accessible to
general public without restrictions on the internet, open
access).

Some argue that the copies required for text and data mining are
covered by the exception for temporary copies in Article5.1of
Directive 2001/29/EC. Others consider that text and data mining
activities should not even be seen as covered by copyright.None
of this is clear, in particular since text and data mining does
not consist only of a single method, but can be undertaken in
several different ways. Important questions also remain as to
whether the main problems arising in relation to this issue
gobeyond copyright (i.e. beyond the necessity or not to obtain
the authorisation to use content) and relate rather to the need
to obtain "access" to content (i.e. being able to use e.g.
commercial databases).

A specific Working Group was set up on this issue in the
framework of the "Licences for Europe" stakeholder dialogue. No
consensus was reached among participating stakeholders on either
the problems to be addressed or the results. At the same time,
practical solutions to facilitate text and data miningof
subscription-based scientific content were presented by

57

publishers as an outcome of "Licences for Europe".In the context
of these discussions, other stakeholders argued that no
additional licences should be required to mine material to
which accesshas been provided through a subscription agreement
and considered that a specific exception for text and data
mining should be introduced, possibly on the basis of a
distinction between commercial and non-commercial.

52.(a) [In particular if you are an end user/consumer or an
institutional user:] Have you experienced obstacles, linked to
copyright, when trying to use text or data mining methods,
including across borders?

[In particular if you are a service provider:] Have you
experienced obstacles, linked to copyright, when providing
services based on text or data mining methods, including across
borders?

[In particular if you are a right holder:] Have you experienced
specific problems resulting fromtheuse of text and data mining
in relation tocopyright protected content, including across
borders?

XNO

There are no impediments to Text and Data Mining (TDM). Authors
and publishers are not blocking access for TDM. Rather, they
are offering solutions,and, to this end, for instance, the
International Association of Scientific, Technical and Medical
publishers(STM)has issued a statement and a sample licence58.
Through this statement, signatory publishers commit to granting
the necessary copyright licences to permit the text and data
mining of copyright-protected works and other subject-matter on
reasonable terms for non-commercial scientific research purposes
in theEU.They will work with rights clearance agents as
necessary, implement licensing systems to facilitate easy
"one-to-many" rights clearance and platforms, and continue to
develop relevant technological solutions to facilitate the
access in an efficient way.

Licensing solutions exist both for commercial and non-commercial
uses, offered by copyright holders directly, or via collective
rights management.

If there are problems, how would they best be solved?

If your view is that a legislative solution is needed, what
would be its main elements? Which activities should be covered
and under what conditions?

There are problems linked to Text and Data Mining (TDM) from the
side of the copyright holders and their representatives. The
main onesarethe need for clear and agreed definitions of text
mining and data mining; right of the copyrightholder to control
access to their databases; protection against unfair competition
linked to commercial exploitation of text and data mining; and
the lack of constructive dialogue with some key user groups, in
particular those who walked out of the European Commission
Licences for Europe stakeholder dialogue initiative. The
preferred way to solve this is to clarify that there will be no
exception for TDM.

If yourview isthat a different solution is needed, what would it
be?

Are there other issues, unrelated to copyright, that constitute
barriers to the use of text or data mining methods?

F. User-generated content

Technological and service developments mean that citizens can
copy, use and distribute content at little to no financial
cost. As a consequence, new types of online activities are
developing rapidly, including the making of so-called
"user-generated content". While users can create totally
original content, they can also take one or several
pre-existingworks, change something in the work(s), and upload
the result on the Internet e.g. to platforms andblogs25

A typical example could be the "kitchen" or "wedding" video
(adding one's own video to a pre-existing sound recording), or
adding one's own text toa pre-existing photograph. Other
examples are "mash-ups" (blending two sound recordings), and
reproducing parts of journalistic work (report, review etc.)
ina blog.

.User-generated content (UGC) can thus cover the modification of
pre-existing works evenif the newly-generated/"uploaded" work
does not necessarily require a creative effort and results from
merely adding, subtracting or associating some pre-existing
content with other pre-existing content. This kind of activity
is not "new" as such. However, the development of social
networking and social media sites that enable users to share
content widely has vastly changed the scale of such activities
and increased the potential economic impact for those holding
rights in the pre-existing works. Re-use is no longer the
preserve of a technically and artistically adept elite. With
the possibilities offered by the new technologies, re-use is
open to all, at no cost. This in turn raises questions with
regard to fundamental rights such the freedom of expression and
the right to property.

A specific Working Group was set up on this issue in the
framework of the "Licences for Europe" stakeholder dialogue. No
consensus was reached among participating stakeholders on either
the problems to be addressed or the results or even the
definition of UGC. Nevertheless, a wide range of views were
presented as to the best way to respond to this phenomenon. One
view was to say that a new exception is needed to cover UGC, in
particular non-commercial activities by individuals such as
combining existing musical works with videos, sequences of
photos, etc. Another view was that no legislative change is
needed: UGC is flourishing, and licensing schemes are
increasingly available (licence schemes concluded

between rightholders and platforms as well as micro-licences
concluded between rightholders and the users generating the
content. In any event, practical solutions to ease
user-generated content and facilitate micro-licensing for small
users were pledged by rightholders across different sectors as a
result of the "Licences for Europe" discussions26

Seethe document "Licences for Europe-ten pledges to bring more
content
online":http://ec.europa.eu/internalmarket/copγright/docs/licences-for-europe/131113ten-pledges
en.pdf.

.

(a) [In particular if you are an end user/consumer:] Have you
experienced problems when trying to use pre-existing works or
other subject matter to disseminatenew content on the Internet,
including across borders?

[In particular if you are a service provider:] Have you
experienced problems when users publish/disseminate new content
based on the pre-existing works or other subject-matter through
your service, including across borders?

[In particular if you are a right holder:] Have you experienced
problems resulting from the way the users are using
pre-existing works or other subject-matterto disseminate new
content on the Internet, including across borders?

X YES

New technologies have encouraged the re-use of pre-existing
protected material in the creation of new material uploaded,
including the modification of that material or the addition of
it to a new piece of content (pictures, poems, articles
inblogsor websites).

It is very difficult to detect such re-uses in new works and
therefore to claim remuneration for it.

(a) [In particular if you are an end user/consumer or a right
holder:] Have you experienced problems when trying to ensure
thatthework you have created (onthebasis of pre-existing works)
is properly identified for online use? Are proprietary systems
sufficient in this context?

(b) [In particular if you are a service provider:] Do you
provide possibilities for users that are
publishing/disseminating the works they have created (on the
basis of pre-existing works) through your service to properly
identify these works for online use?

(a) [In particular if you are an end user/consumer or a right
holder):] Have you experienced problems when trying to be
remunerated fortheuse ofthework you have created (on the basis
of pre-existing works)?

XNO OPINION

(b) [In particular if you are a service provider:] Do you
provide remuneration schemes for users publishing/disseminating
the works they have created (on the basis of pre-existing works)
through yourservice?

If there are problems, how would they bestbe solved?

If your view is that a legislative solution is needed, what
would be its main elements? Which activities should be covered
and under what conditions?

If yourview isthat a different solution is needed, what would it
be?

-Solutionsfor the identification of rightholders, their agents
or other representatives (such as CMOs) from whom permission
can be sought;

-Solutions to give users information about licensing and
licensing conditions: how the licensing process works and what
users can do with a work under a chosen licence;

-Streamlined one-click/click through/accessible and easy
pay-per-use transactional systems that make the licensing
process quicker and easier.

III.Private copying and reprography

Directive 2001/29/EC enables Member States to implement in their
national legislation exceptions or limitations to the
reproduction right for copies made for private use and
photocopying27

Article5.2)(a) and (b) of Directive2001/29.

. Levies are chargesimposed at national level on goods typically
used for such purposes (blank media, recording equipment,
photocopying machines, mobile listening devices such as mp3/mp4
players, computers, etc.) with a view to compensating
rightholders for the harm they suffer when copies are made
without their authorisation by certain categories of persons
(i.e. natural persons making copies for their private use) or
through use of certain technique (i.e. reprography). In that
context, levies are important for rightholders.With the
constant developments in digital technology, the question
arises as to whether the copying of files by
consumers/end-users who have purchased content online-e.g. when
a person has boughtan MP3 file and goes on to store multiple
copies of that file (in her computer, her tablet and her mobile
phone)-also triggers, or should trigger, the application of
private copying levies. It is argued that, in some cases, these
levies may indeed be claimed by rightholders whether or not the
licence fee paid by the service provider already covers copies
made by the end user. This approach could potentially lead to
instances of double payments whereby levies could be claimed on
top of service providers'licence fees6263.

There is also an on-going discussion as to the application or
not of levies to certain types of cloud-based services such as
personal lockers or personal video recorders.

63.In your view, is there a need to clarify at theEUlevel the
scope and application of the private copying and reprography
exceptions28

Art. 5.2(a) and 5.2(b) of Directive 2001/29/EC.

in the digital environment?

X YES

There is a need for clarification that, in respect of text and
image levies, "rightholders" eligiblefor "fair compensation"
comprise both authors and publishers.

Since divergent national systems could involve inequality among
rightholders of different countries, we consider that
clarification and harmonization is needed.

Moreover, it is also neededa European framework guaranteeing
that rightholders obtain an equitable remuneration.

In the digital environment, copies made via web sites,
intranets, cloud services... could be included in the private
copying exception if certain conditions are fulfilled. In that
case, rightholders should obtain remuneration for those copies.
Applying the private copying exception to copies made via web
sites, intranets, and cloud services could mean that those
copies would be taken into account by usage studies which
assess the harm caused.

64.Should digital copies made by end users for private purposes
in the context of a service thathas been licensed by
rightholders, and where the harm to the rightholder is minimal,
be subject to private copying levies?

The CJEU decided in the VG Wort case (C-457/11 to C-460/11) that
a possible consent by the copyright holder to the copying of his
work or other protected material in the context of the
exceptions or limitations provided for in EUCD
Article5.2and5.3has no effect onfair remuneration payable under
the exception. This means that remuneration paid to the author
or publisher under a licence does not preclude from receiving
the fair compensation for the exception or limitation. Such
copies may therefore be covered by thelevies

How would changes in levies with respect to the application to
online services (e.g. services based on cloud computing
allowing, for instance, users to have copies on different
devices) impact the development and functioning of new business
models on the one hand and rightholders'revenue on the other?

Whereauthors and publishers are remunerated for certain uses on
the basis of copyright levies, the device and storage medium
remuneration is also payable if protected works are copied in
connection with online services (e.g. cloud computing). That
is, for example, the case if works are downloaded from a cloud
portal and stored on a PC or storage medium.

Would you see an added value in making levies visible
ontheinvoices for products subjectto levies?29

This issue was also addressed in the recommendations of Mr
AntonioVitorinoresulting from the mediation on private copying
and reprography levies.

X YES

We must point out that on 30th December2011the private copying
compensation system was overhauled in Spain. From that date
onwards, manufacturers, importers or distributors of
reproduction equipment, devices or appliances do not pay any
compensation for private copying to the collective
managementsocieties as a result of marketing them in Spain.
That compensation was replaced by a payment of 5million euros
from the National Budget.

Moreover, the Royal Decree1657/2012,of7December regulating the
procedure for the payment of fair compensation forprivate
copying under the National Budget does not base the amount to
be paid on the actual economic damage caused by the
establishment of the private copying exception.

As this amount was greatly reduced and the same can be
considered as a merely symbolicamount,CEDROfiled a complaint
before theEUCommission and filed an appeal against the Royal
Decree1657/2012before the Administrative Division of the
Supreme Court. Both procedures are still pending.

Nevertheless, for reasons of transparency we havealways argued
in favor of making levies visible on the invoices for products
subject to levies.

Diverging national systems levy different products and apply
different tariffs. This results in obstacles to the free
circulation of goods and services in the Single Market. At the
same time, many Member States continue to allow the
indiscriminate application of private copying levies to all
transactions irrespective of the person to whom the product
subject to a levy is sold (e.g. private person or business).
Inthat context, not all Member States have ex ante exemption
and/or ex post reimbursement schemes which could remedy these
situations and reduce the number of undue payments30

This issue was also addressed in the recommendations of Mr
AntonioVitorinoresulting from the mediation on private copying
and reprography levies.

.

Have you experienced a situation where a cross-border
transaction resulted in undue levy payments, or duplicate
payments of the same levy, or other obstaclesto the free
movement of goods orservices?

What percentage of products subject to a levy is sold to persons
other than natural persons for purposes clearly unrelated to
private copying? Do any of those transactions result in undue
payments? Please explain in detail the example you provide
(type of products, type of transaction, stakeholders, etc.).

In respect of text and image (reprography) levies, the question
is irrelevant, as noted also in the report from the
EC-appointed mediatorAntónio Vitorino.Unlike the scope of the
private copying exception under EUCD Article 5.2(b), which is
limited to reproductions that serve a specific purpose ("for
private use") regardless of the type of device and method, the
reprography exception under EUCD Article 5.2(a) covers
reproductions on a specific medium (paper), using a specific
method ("any kind of photographic technique"), regardless of
its purpose, which may be for professional, educational,
private and other uses. This means that the reprography levies
cover both private and professional uses.

Consequently, when it comes to analyzing the impact of
reprography levies, it is not relevant to make a distinction
between private and professional uses, since both of them are
subject to the payment of a levy. Against this background, it
is also unnecessary to distinguish between sales of devices in
the private and business sectors. The point is that copies are
permitted by law in both the private and business spheres.
The-unified-device and storage medium remuneration can
therefore be justified both for sales to private persons and
sales to business end users.

Moreover, surveys show that personal copying of copyrighted
works at the workplace is a common practice.

Where such undue payments arise,what percentage of trade do they
affect? To what extent could a priori exemptions and/or ex post
reimbursement schemes existing in some Member States help to
remedy the situation?

If you have identified specific problems with the current
functioningof the levy system, how would these problems best be
solved?

In Spain, as we have mentioned before the copying levy system
was overhauled and was replaced by a payment charged to the
National Budget.

TheEUcould contribute to clarificationthrough sensitizing EC
officials andEUpolicy makers and institutions that text and
image (reprography) and private levies are different, and
ensure consistency in their dealing with the two different levy
schemes.

Also it should be considered to what extent the handling of
cases of export could be facilitated by a central European
agency, and the obligation for exporters to pay the levy
according to the rules of the country of destination should be
regulated.

IV.Fair remuneration of authors and performers

TheEUcopyright acquis recognises for authors and performers a
number of exclusive rights and, in the case of performers whose
performances are fixed in phonograms, remuneration rights. There
are few provisions in theEUcopyright law governing thetransferof
rights from authors or performers to producers31

See e.g. Directive 92/100/EEC, Art.2(4)-(7).

or determining who the owner of the rights is when the work or
other subject matter is created in the context of an employment
contract32

See e.g. Art.2.3.of Directive 2009/24/EC, Art.4of Directive
96/9/EC.

. This is an area that has been traditionally left for Member
States to regulate and there are significant differences in
regulatory approaches. Substantial differences also exist
between different sectors of the creative industries.

Concerns continue to be raised that authors and performers are
not adequately remunerated, in particular but not solely, as
regards online exploitation. Many consider that the economic
benefit of new formsof exploitation is not being fairly shared
along the whole value chain. Another commonly raised issue
concerns contractual practices, negotiation mechanisms,
presumptions of transfer of rights, buy-out clauses and the
lack of possibility to terminate contracts. Some stakeholders
are of the opinion that rules at national level do not suffice
to improve their situation and that action atEUlevel is
necessary.

[In particular if you are an author/performer:] What is the best
mechanism (or combination ofmechanisms) to ensure that you
receive an adequate remuneration fortheexploitation of your
works and performances?

For secondary uses administered by RROs, fair compensation is
ensured via the RROs' distribution rules and the requirement of
appropriate representation by both authors and publishers on its
decision-making bodies. Nevertheless, equitable compensations
are needed to compensate uses made without the control and
authorisation of rightholders.

Is there a need to act at theEUlevel (for instance to prohibit
certain clauses in contracts)?

XNO OPINION

If you consider that the current rules are not effective, what
would you suggest to address the shortcomings you identify?

[Open question]

V.Respectfor rights

Directive 2004/48/EE provides for a harmonised framework for the
civil enforcement of intellectual property rights, including
copyright and related rights. The Commission has

70

consulted broadly on this text.Concerns have been raised as to
whether some of its provisions are still fit to ensure a proper
respect for copyright in the digital age. On the one hand, the
current measures seem to be insufficient to deal with the new
challenges brought by the dissemination of digitalcontent on
the internet; on the other hand, there are concerns about the
current balance between enforcement of copyright and the
protection of fundamental rights, in particular the right for a
private life and data protection. While it cannot be
contestedthat enforcement measures should always be available
in case of infringement of copyright, measures could be
proposed to strengthen respect for copyright when the infringed

71

content is used for a commercial purpose.One means to do this
could be to clarify the role of intermediaries in the IP
infrastructure33

This clarification should not affect the liability regime of
intermediary service providers established by
Directive2000/31/EC on electronic commerce, which will remain
unchanged.

. At the same time, there could be clarification of the
safeguards for respect of private life and data protection for
private users.

Should the civil enforcement system in theEUbe rendered more
efficient for infringements of copyright committed with a
commercial purpose?

XYES

Wider legal access to works can only be achieved through
appropriate mechanisms which include direct licensing by
authors and publishers and collective management of rights,
combined with financial incentives, protection against
infringement and copyright enforcement, including efficient
combating of piracy and other forms of unauthorized
reproduction, including online infringements. RROs play an
indispensable role in assisting authors and publishers to
enable wider legal access to their works and in awareness
raising and enforcement of rights.

Inparticular, is the current legal framework clear enough to
allow for sufficient involvement of intermediaries (such as
Internet service providers, advertisingbrokers, payment service
providers, domain name registrars, etc.) in
inhibitingonlinecopyright infringements with a commercial
purpose? If not, what measures would be useful to foster the
cooperation of intermediaries?

Collaboration with Internet ServiceProviders (ISPs) to address
copyright infringement and enforcement issues is welcome. The
Commission could facilitate initiatives in this respect through
financial contributions to awareness-raising campaigns. The use
of filtering technologies by ISPs andothers as well as systems
to inform about authorised use (e.g. through search engines
using the ACAP73) are highly welcome and should be encouraged.
These are mechanisms which help in enforcing contractual terms
and preventing the networks from being usedto infringe
intellectual property.

The Commission should also encourage the investment in new
business models. Theestablishmentofasustainable legal offer,
reflectingthe cultural diversity of the European written
sector, can only take place in an environment ensuring the full
respect of copyright and, therefore, the-financial-independence
of creators. Against this background, we request that the
Commission maintains a stable and predictable legal framework,
promoting its rationale and its enforcement by all players.

76.Does the current civilenforcement framework ensurethat the
right balance is achieved between the right to have one's
copyright respected and other rights such as the protection
ofprivate life and protection of personal data?

X NO

The balance of protection of copyright with other fundamental
rights, such as privacy and protection of personal data, needs
to be found on the basis of the principle of proportionality,
in the discretion of Member States (see the casesProductores de
Música de España (Promusicae)vTelefónica de
EspañaSAU(C-275/0674) andLSG-Gesellschaft zur Wahrnehmung von
Leistungsschutzrechten GmbH v Tele2 Telecommunication GmbH
(C-557/0775)).However, recent cases in Spain show that service
providers don't collaborate in the identification of
infringers. Consequently, rightholders need to be able to
identify the owner of an infringing website or a service
provider client that is using the web to share or upload
copyrighted works without authorization.

VI.A singleEUCopyright Title

The idea of establishing a unifiedEUCopyright Title has been
present in the copyright debate for quite some time now,
although views as to the merits and the feasibility of such an
objective are divided. A unifiedEUCopyright Title would totally
harmonise the area of copyright law in theEUand replace national
laws. There would then be a singleEUtitle instead of a bundle of
national rights. Some see this as the only manner in which a
truly Single Market for content protected by copyright can be
ensured, while others believe that the sameobjective can better
be achieved by establishing a higher level ofharmonisationwhile
allowing for a certain degree of flexibility and specificity in
Member States' legal systems.

77.Should theEUpursue the establishment of a singleEUCopyright
Title,as a means of establishing a consistent framework for
rights and exceptions to copyright acrossthe EU,as well as a
single framework for enforcement?

XNO OPINION

Work on a singleEUCopyright Title would requiresubstantial
resources and unnecessarily distract focus from the important
work on an overallEUIP strategy. Also, it is difficult to see
how it could be established on the basis of Article118of the
Lisbon Treaty (TFEU). Nevertheless, we insist on the need of a
higher degree of harmonization in order to prevent differences
among rightholders from different member states and to ensure
certainty for users.

htto://curia.europa.eu/iuris/liste.isf?language=en&num=C-275/06

htto://curia.europa.eu/iuris/liste.isf?language=en&num=C-557/07

78.Should this be the next step in the development of copyright
in theEU?Does the current level of difference amongtheMember
State legislation mean that this is a longer term project?

[Open question]

VII.Other issues

The above questionnaire aims to provide a comprehensive
consultation on the most important matters relating to the
currentEUlegal framework for copyright.Should any important
matters have been omitted, we would appreciate if you could
bring them to our attention, so they can be properly addressed
in the future.

79.Are there any other important matters related to theEUlegal
framework for copyright? Please explain and indicate how such
matters should be addressed.

Wesuggest that the creation of a specialized panel of judges,
responsible for copyright legal matters, is created at the
CJEU. More and more cases oncopyright issues are decided by the
CJEU. This requires a stable institution with copyright experts.

3  Collective Management Organisations play a significant role
in the management of online rights for musical works in
contrastto the situation where online rights are licensed
directly by right holders such as film or record producers or
by newspaper or book publishers.

7  For possible long term measures such as the establishment of
a European Copyright Code (establishing a single title) see
sectionVIIof this consultation document.

8For instance, the Reflection Document on "Creative Content in a
European Digital Single Market: Challenges for the
Future",22October2009,page12,second paragraph, lines5-7,states
that: "the present legal framework does not in itself prevent
rightholders from commercialising their works on a
multi-territory basis".

9http://www.ifrro.org/node/1114

')http://curia.europa.eu/¡uris/document/document.¡sf?te\t=&docid=l44496&paaelnde\=0&doclana=EN&mode=lst&dir=&occ=first&part=1
&cid=399913

11  Supra,footnote8,para.72.

12
htto://curia.europa.eu/iuris/liste.isf?language=en&num=C-403/08

13  Directive 2001/29/EC of the European Parliament and of the
Council of22May2001on theharmonisationof certain aspects of
copyrightand related rights in the information society.

17  The right to "authorise or prohibit direct or indirect,
temporary or permanent reproduction by any means and in any
form, in whole or in part" (see Art.2of Directive2001/29/EC)
although temporary acts of reproduction of a transient or
incidental nature are, under certain conditions, excluded (see
art.5(1)of Directive 2001/29/EC).

18  The right to authorise or prohibit any communication to the
public by wire or wireless means and to authorise or
prohibitthe making available to the public "on demand" (see
Art.3of Directive 2001/29/EC).

20  Injunctive relief is a temporary or permanent remedy
allowing the right holder to stop or prevent an infringement of
his/her right.

21  Cases C-466/12(Svensson),C-348/13(BestwaterInternational)
and C-279/13 (C More entertainment).

22  Case C-360/13 (Public Relations Consultants Association
Ltd). See
alsohttp://www.supremecourt.gov.uk/decided-cases/docs/UKSC2011
0202PressSummary.pdf.

23  In
English:https://www.bumastemra.nl/wp-content/uploads/2012-12-19-iudgment-Buma-Stemra-Souren-Eng.pdf

24
See:http://stakeholders.ofcom.org.uk/binaries/research/telecoms-research/online-copγright/deep-dive.pdf

27
See:http://mashable.com/2013/03/08/apple-amazon-used-goods-marketplaces/

28  http://curia.europa.eu/iuris/documents.isf?num=C-128/11

29  Case No4O191/11,Landgericht(German Regional Court)
Bielefeld,5March2013 ,available (in
German)here:http://www.ifrro.org/sites/default/files/lg
bielefeldvom05.03.13klageverbraucherzentralen.pdf

30  For example, it does not affect "domestic" works-i.e. works
originating in the country imposing the formalities as opposed
to works originating in another country.

31  On the basis of Article3.6of the Directive 2012/28/EUof the
European Parliament and of the Council of25October2012on
certain permitted uses of orphan works, a publicly accessible
online database is currently being set up by the Office
forHarmonisationof the Internal Market (OHIM) for the
registrationof orphan works.

32  E.g. the International Standard Recording Code (ISRC) is
used to identify recordings, the International Standard Book
Number (ISBN) is used to identify books.

33  You will find more informationabout this initiative on the
following website:http://www.globalrepertoiredatabase.com/.

35  You will find more information about this initiative on the
following website:http://www.copyrighthub.co .uk/.

38  Article9(2)of the Berne Convention for the Protection of
Literary and Artistic Works(1971);Article13of the TRIPS
Agreement (Trade Related Intellectual Property
Rights)1994;Article16(2)oftheWIPOPerformers and Phonograms
Treaty(1996);Article9(2)of theWIPOCopyright Treaty(1996).

39  Other than the grandfatheringof the exceptions of minor
importance for analogue uses existing in Member States at the
time of adoption of Directive 2001/29/EC (see, Art. 5(3)(o)).

42  Article 5(2)c of Directive2001/29.

45  http://www.ifrro.org/content/i2010-digital-libraries

46  http://www.arrow-net.eu/

48  France and Germany have already adopted legislation to back
the effects of the MoU. The French act(LOI
n02012-287du1ermars2012relative à l'exploitation numérique des
livres indisponibles du xxe siècle)foreseescollective
management,unless the author or publisher in question opposes
such management. The German act(Gesetz zur Nutzung verwaister
und vergriffener Werke und einer weiteren Änderung des
Urheberrechtsgesetzes
vom1.Oktober2013)containsalegalpresumption of representation by
a collecting society in relation to works whose rightholders are
not members of the collecting society.

50
See:http://www.ifrro.org/content/cedro-launches-conlicenciacom

52  Article5(3)b of Directive2001/29.

55  More information:http://idpf.org/epub

57See the document "Licences for Europe-ten pledges to bring
more content
online":http://ec.europa.eu/internalmarket/copYright/docs/licences-for-europe/131113
ten-pledges en.pdf.

58http://www.stm-assoc.org/text-and-data-mining-stm-statement-sample-licence/

62  Communication "Unleashing the Potential of Cloud Computing
in Europe", C0M(2012)529final.

63  These issues were addressed in the recommendations of
MrAntónio Vitorinoresulting from the mediation on private
copying and reprography levies. You can consult these
recommendations on the following
website:http://ec.europa.eu/internalmarket/copγright/docs/levγreform/130131
levies-vitorino-recommendations en.pdf.

69  Directive 2004/48/EC of the European Parliament and of the
Council of29April2004on the enforcement of intellectual
property rights.

70  You will find more information on the following
website:http://ec.europa.eu/internal
market/iprenforcement/directive/index en.htm

71  For example when the infringing content is offered on a
website which gets advertising revenues that depend on the
volume of traffic.

73  http://www.the-acap.org/

