


Public Consultation

on the review of the EU copyright rules

Please identify yourself:

Name:..

Uitgeverij mjPublishing, lid van VUV en akkoord met het
standpunt VUV. mjPublishing is een niche uitgever educatief
voor het horeca onderwijs.

Type of respondent(Pleaseunderlinethe appropriate):

Publisher/Producer/Broadcaster

Other(Please explain):

Access to your content across Europe

Why is it not possible to accessmanyonline content servicesfrom
anywhere in Europe?1.[In particular if you arean
enduser/consumer:]Have you faced problems whentryingto access
online services in an EU Member State other than the one in
which you live?

YES - Please provide examples indicating the Member State,
the sector and the type of content concerned (e.g. premium
content such as certain films and TV series, audio-visual
content in general, music, e-books, magazines, journals and
newspapers, games, applications and other software)

NO

NO OPINION

3.[In particular if you area right holder or acollective
management organisation:]Howoftenare youaskedtogrant
multi-territorial licences?Pleaseindicate, if possible, the
number of requests per yearand provide examples indicating the
Member State, the sector and the type of content concerned.

[Openquestion]

Ik verleen (bijna) altijd multi-territoriale licenties, dit is
een algemeen gebruik in de boekensector.

5.[In particular if you area right holder or acollective
management organisation:]Are there reasons why, evenin cases
where you holdall thenecessaryrights forall theterritoriesin
question,youwould still find it necessaryor justifiedto impose
territorial restrictions onaservice provider (in order, for
instance, to ensure that access to certain content is not
possible in certainEuropeancountries)?

YES – Please explain by giving examples

NO

Er zijn maar in uitzonderlijke omstandigheden redenen om de
toegang tot de e-boeken die ik uitgeef te beperken.

NO OPINION

7.Do you think that further measures (legislative or
non-legislative, including market-led solutions) are needed at
EU level to increase the cross-border availability of content
services in the Single Market, while ensuring an adequate level
ofprotection for right holders?

YES – Please explain

NO– Please explain

Er bestaat geen nood daartoe in de boekensector.

NO OPINION

8.Isthe scope of the“making available”right in cross-border
situations – i.e. when content is disseminated across borders
–sufficiently clear?

YES

NO–Pleaseexplain how this could be clarified and what
typeofclarification would be required(e.g.as in "targeting"
approach explained above,as in "country of origin"approach1

The objective of implementing a “country of origin”approachis to
localise the copyright relevant act that must be licenced in a
single Member State (the "country of origin", which could be
for example the Member State in whichthe content is uploaded or
wherethe service provider is established), regardless of in how
many Member States the work canbe accessed or received. Such an
approachhas already been introduced at EU level with regard to
broadcasting by satellite(seeDirective 93/83/EEC on the
coordination of certain rules concerning copyright and rights
related to copyright applicable to satellite broadcasting and
cable retransmission).

)

NO OPINION

9.[In particular if you are a right holder:]Coulda clarification
of the territorial scope of the“making available”right have
aneffect on therecognition of yourrights (e.g.whetheryou are
considered to be an author or not,whetheryou are considered to
have transferred your rights or not),onyourremuneration,
oronthe enforcement of rights(including the availability of
injunctive relief2

Injunctive relief is a temporary or permanent remedy allowing
the right holder to stop or prevent an infringement of his/her
right.

)?

YES –Please explain howsuchpotential effectscould beaddressed

NO

NO OPINION

10.[In particular if youa service provider or a right
holder:]Does the application of two rights toa single act of
economic exploitation in the online environment (e.g. a
download)create problemsfor you?

YES – Please explainwhat type of measureswould be needed in
order to address such problems (e.g. facilitation of joint
licences when the rights are in different hands,legislation to
achieve the "bundling of rights")

 NO

NO OPINION

4.Download to own digital content

14.[In particular if you area right holderor a service
provider:] What would betheconsequencesofproviding a legal
framework enabling the resale ofpreviouslypurchaseddigital
content? Please specify per market(type of content)concerned.

[Open question]

De doorverkoop en uitlening van e-boeken in de vorm van een
wettelijke uitzondering zou dramatische gevolgen teweeg brengen
op onze markt. Er iseen fundamenteel verschil tussen e-boeken en
fysieke boeken. De distributie van fysieke boeken is onderhevig
aan slijtage, wat niet het geval is voor e-boeken die hun
digitale kwaliteit behouden. Ditgebruiktransponeren naar
e-boeken zou ontzettend schadelijk zijn voor de zeer prille
e-boeken markt in België.

Limitations and exceptions in the Single Market

21.Are there problems arising from the fact that most
limitations and exceptions provided in the
EUcopyrightdirectivesare optionalfor the Member States?

YES – Please explain by referring to specific cases

NO – Please explain

Er is geen probleem, aangezien de belangrijkste uitzonderingen
met betrekking tot onderwijs, wetenschap, uitlening of toegang
voor personen met een handicap al geïmplementeerd werden in
Belgische wetgeving en in de meeste lidstaten van de EU.

NO OPINION

22.Should some/all of the exceptions be made mandatory and, if
so, is there aneed for a higher level of harmonisation of such
exceptions?

YES–Please explain byreferringto specific cases

NO – Please explain

Dit is niet verenigbaar met de verschillende culturele en
nationale tradities die binnen de EU bestaanen die
gereflecteerd wordenin het nationale auteursrecht.

NO OPINION

24.Independently from the questions above, is there a need to
provide for agreaterdegree of flexibility in the EU regulatory
framework for limitations and exceptions?

YES – Please explain why

NO – Please explain why

De huidige bewoordingen in de auteurswetgeving zijn al voldoende
flexibel.

NO OPINION

26.Does the territoriality of limitations and exceptions, in
your experience,constitute a problem?

YES–Please explain why andspecify which exceptions you are
referring to

NO – Please explain why and specify which exceptions you are
referring to

Als uitgever doen ook wij een beroep op wettelijke
uitzonderingen zoals het citaatrecht om deze boeken vervolgens
te verkopen in België en daarbuiten. We ondervonden nog nooit
problemen bij de doorverkoop van boeken in Europa of elders in
de wereld.

NO OPINION

27.In the event that limitationsand exceptionsestablished at
national level were to have cross-border effect, howshouldthe
question of “fair compensation” be addressed, whensuch
compensation is part of the exception? (e.g. who pays whom,
where?)

[Open question]

Het is van cruciaal belang dat gebruiken,toegestaan door
wettelijke uitzonderingen,worden vergoed.
Indienaandezewettelijkeuitzonderingen een grensoverschrijdend
effectzou worden toegekend, zou er moeten worden bepaald wie
deze vergoedingenmoetbetalen. Het mag niet leiden tot de
verdwijning van deze vorm van vergoeding die noodzakelijk is om
auteurs en uitgevers te vergoeden voor de schade die wordt
toegebracht aan de normale, commerciële exploitatie
vanhunuitgaven.

Access to content in libraries and archivesPreservationand
archiving

28.(b)[In particular if you arearightholder:]Have you
experienced problems with the use by libraries, educational
establishments, museum or archives of the preservation
exception?

YES – Please explain, by Member State, sector, and the type
of use in question.

NO

NO OPINION

Off-premises access to library collections

32.(c)[In particular if you are arightholder:]Have you
negotiated agreements with institutional users that enable
those institutions to provide remote access, including across
borders,to the works or other subject-matter in their
collections, for purposes of research and private study?

[Open question]

We hebben geen overeenkomsten met deze instellingen want onze
uitgaven worden niet aangekocht door deze instellingen.

E –lending

36.(c)[In particular if you are aright holder:]Have you
negotiated agreements with libraries to enable them to lend
books or other materials electronically, including across
borders?

YES –Pleaseexplainwith specific examples

.

Wehebben geen onderhandelde overeenkomsten want onze uitgaven
worden niet aangekocht door deze instellingen.

NO

NO OPINION

Teaching

42.(b)[In particular if youarearight holder:]Have
youexperiencedspecificproblems resulting from the wayin
whichworks or other subject-matter are used for illustration
for teaching, including across borders?

YES–Please explain

NO

NO OPINION

44.What mechanisms exist in the market place to facilitate the
use of content for illustration for teaching purposes?How
successful are they?

[Open question]

We hebben rechtstreekse licenties met de
scholen/universiteitenvoorhet gebruik van de inhouden van onze
boeken voor illustratie in het kader van onderwijsdoeleinden,
dat de wettelijke uitzondering te buiten gaat en zonder afbreuk
te doen aan de bestaande wettelijke uitzonderingen die reeds
bepaalde gebruiken toestaan.

Research

47.(b)[In particular if you area right
holder:]Haveyouexperiencedspecificproblemsresulting from the
wayin whichworks or other subject-matter are usedin
thecontextof research projects/activities, including across
borders?

YES–Please explain

NO

NO OPINION

49.
===

What mechanisms exist in the Member States to facilitate the use
of content for research purposes? How successful are they?

.

Disabilities

50.(c)[In particular if you are arightholder:]Have you
experiencedspecificproblems resulting fromthe application of
limitations or exceptions allowing for the
distribution/communication of works published in special
formats, including across borders?

YES–Please explainby giving examples

NO

NO OPINION

52.
===

What mechanisms exist in the market place to facilitate
accessibility to content? How successful are they?

[Open question]

Via epub 3 en het DAISY format is het mogelijk om meer e-boeken
toegankelijk te maken voor blinden en slechtzienden.

Text and data mining

53.(c)[In particular if you are a rightholder:]Have you
experiencedspecificproblems resulting fromthe useof textand
data mining in relation to copyright protected content,
including across borders?

YES–Please explain

NO – Please explain

De vraag werd me nog nooit gesteld.

NO OPINION

55.If your view is thatadifferent solutionisneeded, what would
it be?

[Open question]

We treden het standpunt van STM bij alsook initiatieven zoals
hetCross Ref’s Prospect.(http://www.crossref.org/).

57.Are there other issues, unrelated to copyright, that
constitute barriers to the use of text or data mining methods?

[Open question]

De ontwikkeling van een specifieke technologische omgeving zoals
een API waarlangs de onderzoeker de inhouden kan downloaden
alvorens ze te analyseren, kost handenvol geld. Een
uitzondering zal deze technische problemen niet oplossen.

User-generated content
======================

58.(c)[In particular if you are a right holder:]Have you
experiencedproblems resulting from the waythe usersare using
pre-existing works or other subject-matter to disseminate new
content on the Internet, including across borders?

YES – Please explain by giving examples

NO

NO OPINION

59.(a)[In particular if you are an end user/consumer or aright
holder:]Have you experienced problems when trying to ensure
that the work you have created (on the basis of pre-existing
works) is properly identified for online use?Are proprietary
systems sufficient in this context?

YES – Please explain

NO–Please explain

Boeken kunnen gemakkelijk worden geïdentificeerd door middel van
het ISBN nummer. Wanneer we een uitgave maken die gebaseerd is
op reeds bestaande werken, doen we een beroep op het
citaatrecht of zorgen we ervoor dat de rechten geklaard worden
bij de originele rechthebbenden. We zijn steeds op deze manier
tewerk gegaan, een wetswijziging is dus niet nodig.

NO OPINION

Fairremuneration of authors and performers

73.Istherea need to actat theEU level (for instance to prohibit
certain clauses in contracts)?

YES–Please explain

 NO – Please explain why

De Belgische auteurswetgeving is zeer streng inzake
uitgavecontracten en zorgt voor evenwichtige contracten met
heel wat beschermingsmechanismen voor de auteur. We zien geen
reden voor een Europese wetgeving betreffende
auteurscontracten. Bovendien ishetovereenkomstenrecht een bij
uitstek nationale bevoegdheid.

NO OPINION

Respectforrights

75.Shouldthe civil enforcement system in the EU be rendered more
efficient for infringements of copyright committed with a
commercial purpose?

YES–Please explain

We zijn tevreden met de huidige wetgeving, al is er duidelijk
ruimte voor verbetering.

We zouden beter beschermd zijn door een wettelijk vermoeden van
eigendom/overdracht dan als rechthebbenden om juridische
stappen te kunnen ondernemen. We zijn geen voorstander van het
vervolgen van individuen, maar willen strenger en sneller
kunnen optreden tegen websites die illegaleboekenaanbieden.
Bepaalde websites kunnen als niet-commerciële initiatieven
overkomen, maar vaak zijn ze dat wel door bijvoorbeeld
hetgebruik van advertentieruimtes.

NO–Please explain

NO OPINION

76.In particular,isthe current legal framework clear enough to
allow for sufficient involvement of intermediaries (such as
Internet service providers, advertising brokers, payment
service providers, domain name registrars, etc.) in inhibiting
online copyright infringements with a commercial purpose? If
not, whatmeasureswould be useful to foster the cooperation of
intermediaries?

[Open question]

Het is noodzakelijk dat bepaalde tussenpersonen zoals
adverteerders,PayPaldiensten, registratiediensten voor
domeinnamen en internet zoekmachines, die wel varen bij het
bestaan van illegale inhouden op het internet en piraterij in
het algemeen, worden aangemoedigd om meer samen te werken om
het probleem van piraterij een halt toe te roepen.

77.Does the current civil enforcement framework ensure that the
right balance is achieved between the right to have one’s
copyright respected and other rights such as the
protectionofprivate life and protection of personal data?

YES–Please explain

NO– Please explain

Beide rechtenmoeten worden gerespecteerd maar het recht op de
bescherming van privacy en persoonsgegevens mag niet voorkomen
dater wordt opgekomenvoor de bescherming en handhaving van onze
intellectuele eigendomsrechten.

NO OPINION

