


Public Consultation

on the review of the EU copyright rules

Please identify yourself:

Name:

CatherineGoethals,adjointeà la Direction Artistiquedu studio
Mediatoon Licensing (SADargaud-Lombard).Notre société a un CA
annuel de40 millions d’euroset emploie47personnes. Nous
sommesmembresde l’Association des Editeurs Belges (ADEB)dont
nous soutenons laposition dans ce dossier.

Type of respondent(Pleaseunderlinethe appropriate):

Publisher/Producer/Broadcaster

Other(Please explain):

Access to your content across Europe

Why is it not possible to accessmanyonline content servicesfrom
anywhere in Europe?1.[In particular if you arean
enduser/consumer:]Have you faced problems whentryingto access
online services in an EU Member State other than the one in
which you live?

YES - Please provide examples indicating the Member State,
the sector and the type of content concerned (e.g. premium
content such as certain films and TV series, audio-visual
content in general, music, e-books, magazines, journals and
newspapers, games, applications and other software)

NO

NO OPINION

3.[In particular if you area right holder or acollective
management organisation:]Howoftenare youaskedtogrant
multi-territorial licences?Pleaseindicate, if possible, the
number of requests per yearand provide examples indicating the
Member State, the sector and the type of content concerned.

[Open question]

Nous octroyons des licences multi –territoriales en tenant
compte des impératifs de langues et des besoins de nos
partenaires qui connaissent bien leurs marchés.

5.[In particular if you area right holder or acollective
management organisation:]Are there reasons why, evenin cases
where you holdall thenecessaryrights forall theterritoriesin
question,youwould still find it necessaryor justifiedto impose
territorial restrictions onaservice provider (in order, for
instance, to ensure that access to certain content is not
possible in certainEuropeancountries)?

YES – Please explain by giving examples

NO

Les licences multi-territoriales ne posent pas de problème. Nous
négocions avec nos partenaires étrangers des licences qui
correspondent à leurs besoins, leurs marchés et qui soient
adaptées avec les langues et les pratiques culturelles de ces
différents pays.

NO OPINION

7.Do you think that further measures (legislative or
non-legislative, including market-led solutions) are needed at
EU level to increase the cross-border availability of content
services in the Single Market, while ensuring an adequate level
ofprotection for right holders?

YES – Please explain

NO– Please explain

De nouvelles mesures ne sont pas nécessairespour le secteur de
l’édition du livre.

NO OPINION

8.Isthe scope of the“making available”right in cross-border
situations – i.e. when content is disseminated across borders
–sufficiently clear?

YES

NO–Pleaseexplain how this could be clarified and what
typeofclarification would be required(e.g.as in "targeting"
approach explained above,as in "country of origin"approach1

The objective of implementing a “country of origin”approachis to
localise the copyright relevant act that must be licenced in a
single Member State (the "country of origin", which could be
for example the Member State in whichthe content is uploaded or
wherethe service provider is established), regardless of in how
many Member States the work canbe accessed or received. Such an
approachhas already been introduced at EU level with regard to
broadcasting by satellite(seeDirective 93/83/EEC on the
coordination of certain rules concerning copyright and rights
related to copyright applicable to satellite broadcasting and
cable retransmission).

)

NO OPINION

9.[In particular if you are a right holder:]Coulda clarification
of the territorial scope of the“making available”right have
aneffect on therecognition of yourrights (e.g.whetheryou are
considered to be an author or not,whetheryou are considered to
have transferred your rights or not),onyourremuneration,
oronthe enforcement of rights(including the availability of
injunctive relief2

Injunctive relief is a temporary or permanent remedy allowing
the right holder to stop or prevent an infringement of his/her
right.

)?

YES –Please explain howsuchpotential effectscould beaddressed

NO

NO OPINION

10.[In particular if youa service provider or a right
holder:]Does the application of two rights toa single act of
economic exploitation in the online environment (e.g. a
download)create problemsfor you?

YES – Please explainwhat type of measureswould be needed in
order to address such problems (e.g. facilitation of joint
licences when the rights are in different hands,legislation to
achieve the "bundling of rights")

 NO

NO OPINION

4.Download to own digital content

14.[In particular if you area right holderor a service
provider:] What would betheconsequencesofproviding a legal
framework enabling the resale ofpreviouslypurchaseddigital
content? Please specify per market(type of content)concerned.

[Open question]

Nous ne pouvons concevoir que des e-books puissent être revendus
et loués grâce àune exception sans avoir de conséquences
dramatiques pour notre marché. Il y a de bonnes raisonspourque
la vente en seconde main ne soit permise que pour les
exemplaires physiquesqui eux s’usent avec le temps. Ce n’est
pas le cas des e-books dont la qualité ne s’altère jamais.
Permettre un marché de seconde main des e-books aurait des
conséquences désastreuses pour les éditeurs, les auteurset les
lecteurs.

Limitations and exceptions in the Single Market

21.Are there problems arising from the fact that most
limitations and exceptions provided in the
EUcopyrightdirectivesare optionalfor the Member States?

YES – Please explain by referring to specific cases

NO – Please explain

Nous nevoyons aucun problème puisque la plupart des exceptions
importantes au bénéfice de l’enseignement, de la recherche, des
bibliothèques ou des personnesaffectées d’un handicapsont en
place dans toutes les législations à travers l’Europe.

NO OPINION

22.Should some/all of the exceptions be made mandatory and, if
so, is there aneed for a higher level of harmonisation of such
exceptions?

YES–Please explain byreferringto specific cases

NO – Please explain

Cela ne serait pas compatible avec le respect des traditions
nationales et culturelles qui font partie intégrante de nos
législationsen matière de droit d’auteur.

NO OPINION

24.Independently from the questions above, is there a need to
provide for agreaterdegree of flexibility in the EU regulatory
framework for limitations and exceptions?

YES – Please explain why

NO – Please explain why

La rédaction actuelleest suffisament souple.

NO OPINION

26.Does the territoriality of limitations and exceptions, in
your experience,constitute a problem?

YES–Please explain why andspecify which exceptions you are
referring to

NO – Please explain why and specify which exceptions you are
referring to

En tantqu’éditeur, nousnous réferons si nécessaire
auxexceptionslégales actuellestelles quele droitde citation, le
droit à l’information, à l’enseignement et à la
recherche.Ensuite, nous vendons des livres en Europe et dans le
reste du monde.Nous n’avons jamais rencontré de problèmes.

NO OPINION

27.In the event that limitationsand exceptionsestablished at
national level were to have cross-border effect, howshouldthe
question of “fair compensation” be addressed, whensuch
compensation is part of the exception?(e.g. who pays whom,
where?)

[Open question]

Il est crucial que les exceptionslégalessoient rémunérées. Si
des utilisations sont faites au-delà des frontières, nous
devonsavoir décidéquelle partieva devoir payer. Les usages
transfrontaliers ne doiventen aucun cas conduire à la
disparition decompensationsfinancières au manque à gagner
desauteurset deséditeurs.Il ne faut jamais omettre qu’en amont
de l’édition d’un ouvrage, l’éditeur finance sa création et
prend le risque de ne jamais avoir de retour sur ses
investissements.

Access to content in libraries and archivesPreservationand
archiving

28.(b)[In particular if you arearightholder:]Have you
experienced problems with the use by libraries, educational
establishments, museum or archives of the preservation
exception?

YES – Please explain, by Member State, sector, and the type
of use in question.

NO

NO OPINION

Off-premises access to library collections

32.(c)[In particular if you are arightholder:]Have you
negotiated agreements with institutional users that enable
those institutions to provide remote access, including across
borders,to the works or other subject-matter in their
collections, for purposes of research and private study?

[Open question]

Nous n’avons pas négocié ce genre d’accords carnos ouvrages de
bandes dessinéesne sont pas acheté(e)s par ces institutions à
des fins de recherche.

E –lending

36.(c)[In particular if you are aright holder:]Have you
negotiated agreements with libraries to enable them to lend
books or other materials electronically, including across
borders?

YES –Pleaseexplainwith specific examples

Nous avons négocié des accords avec des bibliothèques
publiques.Ces accords se concluent de manière constructive en
tenant compte des besoinset des impératifsde toutes les
parties.Nous avons développé avec de nombreux éditeurs une
plateforme de diffusion et de distribution numériques
(www.izneo.com) qui permet notamment d’assurer une offre
numérique de qualité et accessible à un maximum de
partenaires.

NO

NO OPINION

Teaching

42.(b)[In particular if youarearight holder:]Have
youexperiencedspecificproblems resulting from the wayin
whichworks or other subject-matter are used for illustration
for teaching, including across borders?

YES–Please explain

NO

NO OPINION

44.What mechanisms exist in the market place to facilitate the
use of content for illustration for teaching purposes?How
successful are they?

[Open question]

Nous avonsdes licences directes avec des éditeurs scolairespour
l’utilisation de notre contenu au titre d’illustration de
l’enseignement.A noter que ces contrats de licence ne portent
pas préjudice aux exceptions légales et qu’ils ne couvrent que
les actes hors du champ d’application de ces exceptions.Ces
licences ne posent pas de problème, nous tenons compte des
besoins et des impératifs de l’enseignement.

Research

47.(b)[In particular if you area right
holder:]Haveyouexperiencedspecificproblemsresulting from the
wayin whichworks or other subject-matter are usedin
thecontextof research projects/activities, including across
borders?

YES–Please explain

NO

NO OPINION

49.What mechanisms exist in the Member States to facilitate the
use of content for research purposes?How successful are they?

Nous avonsdes licences directes avec des éditeurs scolairespour
l’utilisation de notre contenu au titre d’illustration de
l’enseignement. A noter que ces contrats de licence ne
portent pas préjudice aux exceptions légales et qu’ils ne
couvrent que les actes hors du champ d’application de ces
exceptions. Ces licences ne posent pas de problème, nous tenons
compte des besoins et des impératifs de l’enseignement.

Disabilities50.
===

(c)[In particular if you are arightholder:]Have you
experiencedspecific problems resulting from the application of
limitations or exceptions allowing for the
distribution/communication of works published in special
formats, including across borders?

YES–Please explainby giving examples

NO

NO OPINION

52.What mechanisms exist in the market place to facilitate
accessibility to content?How successful are they?

[Open question]

Nous proposons nos ouvrages sur les différents formats afin de
garantir l’accès le plus large possible aux versions numériques
de nos ouvrages.

Text and data mining

53.(c)[In particular if you are a rightholder:]Have you
experiencedspecificproblems resulting fromthe useof textand
data mining in relation to copyright protected content,
including across borders?

YES–Please explain

NO – Please explain

Nous accordons des licences à des conditions standardset sans
frais supplémentairespour les TDM.Nous autorisons nos clients
commerciaux à faire du TDM dont ils conservent le contenu.

NO OPINION

55.If your view is thatadifferent solutionisneeded, what would
it be?

[Open question]

Il serait utile de soutenirles initiatives de Social Data and
Text Miningcomme leCross Ref’s
Prospect.(http://www.crossref.org/).

57.Are there other issues, unrelated to copyright, that
constitute barriers to the use of text or data mining methods?

[Open question]

Le fait de prévoir de nouvelles exceptions légales ne réglera
pas les questions suscitées par les TDM telles que notamment
les questions sur la protection des données privées, les
risques de concurrence déloyale, …

User-generated content
======================

58.(c)[In particular if you are a right holder:]Have you
experiencedproblems resulting from the waythe usersare using
pre-existing works or other subject-matter to disseminate new
content on the Internet, including across borders?

YES – Please explain by giving examples

NO

NO OPINION

59.(a)[In particular if you are an end user/consumer or aright
holder:]Have you experienced problems when trying to ensure
that the work you have created (on the basis of pre-existing
works) is properly identified for online use?Are proprietary
systems sufficient in this context?

YES – Please explain

NO–Please explain

Nos ouvrages bénéficient de l'ISBNet nous mentionnons clairement
les copyrights. Lorsque nous créons uneœuvrebasée sur une œuvre
préexistante, soit nous nous appuyons sur l’exception de
citation ou de parodieou nous demandons les droits nécessaires
auprès des titulaires de droits d’origine. Nous avons toujours
procédé de cettefaçon et ne croyonspasqu’unchangement dans la
législation soitnécessaire.

NO OPINION

Fairremuneration of authors and performers

73.Istherea need to actat theEU level (for instance to prohibit
certain clauses in contracts)?

YES–Please explain

 NO – Please explain why

Le dispositif légal en place est suffisant et permet de
garantirdes contrats équilibrés et non abusifs. Le droit des
contrats est une compétence nationale et nous ne voyons aucun
besoin de créer un droit contractuel EU couvrant les contrats
en matière de droit d’auteur.

NO OPINION

Respectforrights

75.Shouldthe civil enforcement system in the EU be rendered more
efficient for infringements of copyright committed with a
commercial purpose?

YES– Please explain

Nous sommesgénéralement satisfaits de lalégislation
actuelle,mais il y a évidemment toujours la possibilité de
s’améliorer.
En matière de contrefaçon, nous ne sommes pasen faveurd'une
actioncontre les personnes,maisbien contre lessites illégaux.
Ces sitesqui enfreignentle droit d'auteurpeuvent
sembler"non-commerciaux",mais il y afréquemmentdes signesqui
démontrent que ceux-ci engrangent unequantité considérable
d'argent(par exemplevia la publicité).

NO–Please explain

NO OPINION

76.In particular,isthe current legal frameworkclear enough to
allow for sufficient involvement of intermediaries (such as
Internet service providers, advertising brokers, payment
service providers, domain name registrars, etc.) in inhibiting
online copyright infringements with a commercial purpose? If
not, whatmeasureswould be useful to foster the cooperation of
intermediaries?

[Open question]

Nous trouverionscelautilesicertains intermédiairestels
quenotammentles annonceurs, lesservices de paiement,les bureaux
d'enregistrementde noms de domaineet les moteurs
derecherchequiont des informations qui permettraient
d’identifier les identités des personnes à l’initiative de
cessitespiratesétaientencouragés à coopérerdavantage dansles
efforts visant àmettre fin à cesactivitésillégales.

77.Does the current civil enforcement framework ensure that the
right balance is achieved between the right to have one’s
copyright respected and other rights such as the
protectionofprivate life and protection of personal data?

YES–Please explain

NO– Pleaseexplain

Ces deux droitssontimportantsetdoivent être respectés etil ne
faudrait pas quel’un prenne le pas sur l'autre. Toutefois, il
ne nous semble pas justifiable d’invoquer le droit au respect à
la vie privée lorsqu’il s’agit de coopérer pour identifier les
responsables de sites illégaux.

NO OPINION

