


Public Consultation

on the review of the EU copyright rules

Please identify yourself:

Name:Kristeligt Dagblads Forlag

Kristeligt Dagblads Forlag was established in 2008, publishing
non fiction titles about religion, ethics and history. With 2
employees the annual turnover has increased to EUR 900.000
(2013). Since 2012 the publishing house has been part of the
Danish Publishers Association.

Type of respondent(Pleaseunderlinethe appropriate):

Publisher/Producer/Broadcaster

Other(Please explain):

Access to your content across Europe

Why is it not possible to accessmanyonline content servicesfrom
anywhere in Europe?1.[In particular if you arean
enduser/consumer:]Have you faced problems whentryingto access
online services in an EU Member State other than the one in
which you live?

YES - Please provide examples indicating the Member State,
the sector and the type of content concerned (e.g. premium
content such as certain films and TV series, audio-visual
content in general, music, e-books, magazines, journals and
newspapers, games, applications and other software)

NO

NO OPINION

3.[In particular if you area right holder or acollective
management organisation:]Howoftenare youaskedtogrant
multi-territorial licences?Pleaseindicate, if possible,
thenumber of requests per yearand provide examples indicating
the Member State, the sector and the type of content concerned.


[Open question]

Ialmost alwaysgrant multi-territorial licences, which is the
rule inthe book publishing sector.

5.[In particular if you area right holder or acollective
management organisation:]Are there reasons why, evenin cases
where you holdall thenecessaryrights forall theterritoriesin
question,youwould still find it necessaryor justifiedto impose
territorial restrictions onaservice provider (in order, for
instance, to ensure that access to certain content is not
possible in certainEuropeancountries)?

YES – Please explain by giving examples

NO

NO OPINION

7.Do you think that further measures (legislative or
non-legislative, including market-led solutions) are needed at
EU level to increase the cross-border availability of content
services in the Single Market, while ensuring an adequate level
ofprotection for right holders?

YES – Please explain

NO– Please explain

This is not needed for the book publishing sector.

NO OPINION

8.Isthe scope of the“making available”right in cross-border
situations – i.e. when content is disseminated across borders
–sufficiently clear?

YES

NO–Pleaseexplain how this could be clarified and what
typeofclarification would be required(e.g.as in "targeting"
approach explained above,as in "country of origin"approach1

The objective of implementing a “country of origin”approachis to
localise the copyright relevant act that must be licenced in a
single Member State (the "country of origin", which could be
for example the Member State in whichthe content is uploaded or
wherethe service provider is established), regardless of in how
many Member States the work canbe accessed or received. Such an
approachhas already been introduced at EU level with regard to
broadcasting by satellite(seeDirective 93/83/EEC on the
coordination of certain rules concerning copyright and rights
related to copyright applicable to satellite broadcasting and
cable retransmission).

)

NO OPINION

9.[In particular if you are a right holder:]Coulda clarification
of the territorial scope of the“making available”right have
aneffect on therecognition of yourrights (e.g.whetheryou are
considered to be an author or not,whetheryou are considered to
have transferred your rights or not),onyourremuneration,
oronthe enforcement of rights(including the availability of
injunctive relief2

Injunctive relief is a temporary or permanent remedy allowing
the right holder to stop or prevent an infringement of his/her
right.

)?

YES –Please explain howsuchpotential effectscould beaddressed

NO

NO OPINION

10.[In particular if youa service provider or a right
holder:]Does the application of two rights toa single act of
economic exploitation in the online environment (e.g. a
download)create problemsfor you?

YES – Please explainwhat type of measureswould be needed in
order to address such problems (e.g. facilitation of joint
licences when the rights are in different hands,legislation to
achieve the "bundling of rights")

 NO

NO OPINION

4.Download to own digital content

14.[In particular if you area right holderor a service
provider:] What would betheconsequencesofproviding a legal
framework enabling the resale ofpreviouslypurchaseddigital
content? Please specify per market(type of content)concerned.

[Open question]

E-booksbeingre-sold and lendunder an exception willhavedramatic
consequence onthemarketand on the whole value-chain
ofliterature. There is a reason why this can only be done for
the distribution of physical books that bears traces of time
and use, which is not the case with e-books.

Limitations and exceptions in the Single Market

21.Are there problems arising from the fact that most
limitations and exceptions provided in the
EUcopyrightdirectivesare optionalfor the Member States?

YES – Please explain by referring to specific cases

NO – Please explain

We do not see any problems, as most of the important exceptions
such as teaching, research, libraries orfordisabled personsare
presentinalllegislationsacross Europe.

NO OPINION

22.Should some/all of the exceptions be made mandatory and, if
so, is there aneed for a higher level of harmonisation of such
exceptions?

YES–Please explain byreferringto specific cases

NO – Please explain

This would not be compatible with the respect for cultural and
national traditionswhich are embedded in our authors’
rights/copyright legislations.

NO OPINION

24.Independently from the questions above, is there a need to
provide for agreaterdegree of flexibility in the EU regulatory
framework for limitations and exceptions?

YES – Please explain why

NO – Please explain why

The current wording is flexible enough.

NO OPINION

26.Does the territoriality of limitations and exceptions, in
your experience,constitute a problem?

YES–Please explain why andspecify which exceptions you are
referring to

NO – Please explain why and specify which exceptions you are
referring to

As publisher we use exceptions such as the exception for
quotation and sell the books across Europe and the rest of the
world. We never encountered problems.

NO OPINION

27.In the event that limitationsand exceptionsestablished at
national level were to have cross-border effect, howshouldthe
question of “fair compensation” be addressed, whensuch
compensation is part of the exception? (e.g. who pays whom,
where?)

[Open question]

It is crucial thatexceptions are remunerated. If made
cross-border, we need to decide whopays as this should not lead
to the disappearance of compensations which are owed toauthors
andpublishers for undermining thecommercialexploitation of our
works.

Access to content in libraries and archivesPreservationand
archiving

28.(b)[In particular if you arearightholder:]Have you
experienced problems with the use by libraries, educational
establishments, museum or archives of the preservation
exception?

YES – Please explain, by Member State, sector, and the type
of use in question.

NO

NO OPINION

Off-premises access to library collections

32.(c)[In particular if you are arightholder:]Have you
negotiated agreements with institutional users that enable
those institutions to provide remote access, including across
borders,to the works or other subject-matter in their
collections, for purposes of research and private study?

[Open question]

In Denmark there arenegotiated agreementsbetween libraries and
publishers allowing for remote access to e-books.

Rightsholders have extended collective license agreements with
most educational institutions through Copydan that allow for
the educational institutions to make digital copies available
to the students on a remote access basis.

E –lending

36.(c)[In particular if you are aright holder:]Have you
negotiated agreements with libraries to enable them to lend
books or other materials electronically, including across
borders?

YES –Please explainwith specific examples

Since 2011 there have beennegotiated agreements with public
librariesimplying that basically all published e-books are
available to the libraries and to the lenders on a remote
access basis.

NO

NO OPINION

Teaching

42.(b)[In particular if youarearight holder:]Have
youexperiencedspecificproblems resulting from the wayin
whichworks or other subject-matter are used for illustration
for teaching, including across borders?

YES–Please explain

NO

NO OPINION

44.What mechanisms exist in the market place to facilitate the
use of content for illustration for teaching purposes?How
successful are they?

[Open question]

Access is partly provided byour own commercial license schemes
and partly by very well-functioning extended collective
licensing schemes through Copydan that basically imply that all
education institutions have the access to make copies available
both printed and digitally.

Research

47.(b)[In particular if you area right
holder:]Haveyouexperiencedspecificproblemsresulting from the
wayin whichworks or other subject-matter are usedin
thecontextof research projects/activities, including across
borders?

YES–Please explain

NO

NO OPINION

49.
===

What mechanisms exist in the Member States to facilitate the use
of content for research purposes? How successful are they?

Copydan licenses with educational institutions supplement the
licenses that the institution can enter into directly with
publishers concerning periodicals and other scientific and
research publications

Disabilities

50.(c)[In particular if you are arightholder:]Have you
experiencedspecificproblems resulting fromthe application of
limitations or exceptions allowing for the
distribution/communication of works published in special
formats, including across borders?

YES–Please explainby giving examples

NO

NO OPINION

52.
===

What mechanisms exist in the market place to facilitate
accessibility to content? How successful are they?

[Open question]

Thanks to ePub3, we manage to make many more e-books
accessible.Starting in early 2013 we have now published 30-40
titles in this format. Almost all new titles are simultaneously
published as print books and e-books.

Text and data mining

53.(c)[In particular if you are a rightholder:]Have you
experiencedspecificproblems resulting fromthe useof textand
data mining in relation to copyright protected content,
including across borders?

YES–Please explain

NO – Please explain

When asked, publishers are giving authorisation to genuine and
honest requestscoming from non-commercial researchers.We
provide to give licences under standard terms and at no
additional costs. Publishers also allow TDM for commercial
players but thiswillbe under different licensing terms.

NO OPINION

55.If your view is thatadifferent solutionisneeded, what would
it be?

[Open question]

Supporting STM initiative such as Cross Ref’s Prospect.
(http://www.crossref.org/).

57.Are there other issues, unrelated to copyright, that
constitute barriers to the use of text or data mining methods?

[Open question]

Setting up of a specific technical environment which you may not
have already (such as an API, where the researcher may download
the content before mining it, which is not cost-free). An
exception will not be helpful to manage technical issues.

User-generated content
======================

58.(c)[In particular if you are a right holder:]Have you
experiencedproblems resulting from the waythe usersare using
pre-existing works or other subject-matter to disseminate new
content on the Internet, including across borders?

YES – Please explain by giving examples

NO

NO OPINION

59.(a)[In particular if you are an end user/consumer or aright
holder:]Have you experienced problems when trying to ensure
that the work you have created (on the basis of pre-existing
works) is properly identified for online use?Are proprietary
systems sufficient in this context?

YES – Please explain

NO– Please explain

Our work benefits from the ISBNnumber. When we create a work
based on pre-existing work either we rely on the quotation or
parody exception or we clear the rights with the original
rightholders. We have always proceededso and believe that no
change in legislation is needed.

NO OPINION

Fairremuneration of authors and performers

73.Istherea need to actat theEU level (for instance to prohibit
certain clauses in contracts)?

YES–Please explain

 NO – Please explain why

There are already good provisionsto ensure that contracts are
balanced and not abusive. Contractual law is a national
competence and we do not see the need to create a EU
contractual law covering copyright contract.

NO OPINION

Respectforrights

75.Shouldthe civil enforcement system in the EU be rendered more
efficient for infringements of copyright committed with a
commercial purpose?

YES–Please explain

We are satisfied with the current legislation but this could be
improved.

Websites infringing copyright can come across as non-commercial
but there are many elements that makes the non-commercial
characteristic dubious (advertisement, loss in sales, etc).

NO–Please explain

NO OPINION

76.In particular,isthe current legal framework clear enough to
allow for sufficient involvement of intermediaries (such as
Internet service providers, advertising brokers, payment
service providers, domain name registrars, etc.) in inhibiting
online copyright infringements with a commercial purpose? If
not, whatmeasureswould be useful to foster the cooperation of
intermediaries?

[Open question]

We would find it beneficial ifsome intermediaries such as
advertisers, payment services, domain name registrars and
search engine who benefit from pirate website and piracy in
general would be encourage to cooperate more.

77.Does the current civil enforcement framework ensure that the
right balance is achieved between the right to have one’s
copyright respected and other rights such as the
protectionofprivate life and protection of personal data?

YES–Please explain

NO–Please explain

Both should be respected, but one should not take over the
other, and protection of private life and personal data should
not prevent to be able to enforce our intellectual property
rights.

NO OPINION

