


Public Consultation

on the review of the EU copyright rules

Please identify yourself:

Name:

Mohr Siebeck GmbH &Co.KG, Wilhelmstraße 18, D-72074 Tübingen,
Germany.

We currently employ 40 people, our yearly gross income is about
7 million Euros, of which 40 percent come from export,; half of
this export goes to countries outside the EU.

We are a member of the „Börsenverein des deutschen Buchhandels“,
and we endorse their views in this matter.

Type of respondent(Pleaseunderlinethe appropriate):

Publisher/Producer/Broadcaster

Other(Please explain):

Access to your content across Europe

Why is it not possible to access many online content services
from anywhere in Europe?
=======================================================================================

1.[In particular if you are an end user/consumer:]Have you faced
problems when trying to access online services in an EU Member
State other than the one in which you live?

 YES - Please provide examples indicating the Member State,
the sector and the type of content concerned (e.g. premium
content such as certain films and TV series, audio-visual
content in general, music, e-books, magazines, journals and
newspapers, games, applications and other software)

 NO

 NO OPINION

3.[In particular if you are a right holder or a collective
management organisation:]How often are you asked to grant
multi-territorial licences? Please indicate, if possible, the
number of requests per year and provide examples indicating the
Member State, the sector and the type of content concerned.

[Open question]

As a rule weacquire exclusive world rights from authors. This
enables us to market their works in print and in electronic
formats worldwide. Where we are giving licenses to foreign
publishers we usually grant world rights for a certain
language. The same applies tothose eventual books for which we
acquire a license from a foreign publisher for the German of
for the English language.

Every interested person, and especially every interested library
is able to buy our books and/or E-Books at a retailer of his or
her own choice.

5.[In particular if you are a right holder or a collective
management organisation:]Are there reasons why, even in cases
where you hold all the necessary rights for all the territories
in question, you would still find it necessary or justified to
impose territorial restrictions on a service provider (in
order, for instance, to ensure that access to certain content
is not possible in certain European countries)?

 YES – Please explain by giving examples

 NO

NO OPINION

7. Do you think thatfurther measures (legislative or
non-legislative, including market-led solutions) are needed at
EU level to increase the cross-border availability of content
services in the Single Market, while ensuring an adequate level
of protection for right holders?

 YES – Please explain

 NO– Please explain

Books and E-Books seem to us to be easily available on the
European market for any reader. We do not think that this
requires further regulation.

We think that for research an teaching purposes the
interoperability of digital content is of paramount importance.
Any closed system that requires a special machinery or a special
software or the connection to a specific shopsystem hinders the
use of this content even for those purposes that are explicitly
legal.

Any new regulation should concentrate on this problem.

 NO OPINION

8. Is the scope of the “making available” right in cross-border
situations – i.e. when content is disseminated across borders –
sufficiently clear?

 YES

 NO – Please explain how thiscould be clarified and what type
of clarification would be required (e.g. as in "targeting"
approach explained above, as in "country of origin" approach1

The objective of implementing a “country of origin” approach is
to localise the copyright relevant act that must be licenced in
a single Member State (the "country of origin", which could be
for example the Member State in which the content is uploaded
or where the service provider is established), regardless of in
how many Member States the work can beaccessed or received. Such
an approach has already been introduced at EU level with regard
to broadcasting by satellite (see Directive 93/83/EEC on the
coordination of certain rules concerning copyright and rights
related to copyright applicable to satellite broadcasting and
cable retransmission).

)

 NO OPINION

9.[In particular if you are a right holder:]Could
a clarification of the territorial scope of the “making
available” right have an effect on the recognition of your
rights (e.g. whether you areconsidered to be an author or not,
whether you are considered to have transferred your rights or
not), on your remuneration, or on the enforcement of rights
(including the availability of injunctive relief2

Injunctive relief is a temporary or permanent remedy allowing
the right holder to stop or prevent an infringement of his/her
right.

)?

 YES – Please explain how such potential effects could be
addressed

 NO

 NO OPINION

10. [In particular if you a service provider or a right
holder:]Does the application of two rights to a single act of
economic exploitation in the online environment (e.g. a
download) create problems for you?

 YES – Please explain what type of measures would be needed
in order to address such problems (e.g. facilitation of joint
licences when the rights are in different hands, legislation to
achieve the "bundling of rights")

 NO

As a publisher we usually acquire also the right to make
available the texts of the authors, so we can license our
partners. Therefore we do not see anecessity for any new
regulation here.

 NO OPINION

4. Download to own digital content
----------------------------------

14.[In particular if you are a right holder or a service
provider:] What would be the consequences of providing a legal
framework enabling the resale of previouslypurchased digital
content? Please specify per market (type of content) concerned.

[Open question]

There cannot be such a thing as a „used“ E-Book because there is
no deterioration by use. And a copy of a digital document is not
really a copy of the original but rather a clone of it.

If users were allowed to resell E-Books we would have a
secondary market of unlimited size, especially of also „copies“
were allowed to be sold (and how can you diffentiate?)

This would inevitably result in a breakdown of theprimary
market. And that means there would be no means for developing
new E-Books.

Limitations and exceptions in the Single Market

21. Are there problems arising from the fact that most
limitations and exceptions provided in the EU copyright
directivesare optional for the Member States?

 YES – Please explain by referring to specific cases

 NO– Please explain

We do not see any problems here. The most important exceptions
have been legalised in all member states.

 NO OPINION

22. Should some/all of the exceptions be made mandatory and, if
so, is there a need for a higher level of harmonisation of such
exceptions?

 YES – Please explain by referring to specific cases

 NO– Please explain

We do not think this would be helpful. There are (slightly)
different legal traditions and therefore (slightly) different
institutions that do, however, not restrain the common market.

 NO OPINION

24. Independently from the questionsabove, is there a need to
provide for a greater degree of flexibility in the EU
regulatory framework for limitations and exceptions?

 YES – Please explain why

 NO– Please explain why

We think that the current system of optional but clearly defined
limitations and exceptions allow for enough flexibility.

Broader rules like the US-American Fair Use exception lead to a
higher degree of legal uncertainty resulting in long and costly
lawsuits like Author's Guild vs. Google. And in the end this
would mean that judges would „make“ the details of copyright
instead of parliaments.

 NO OPINION

26. Does the territoriality of limitations and exceptions, in
your experience, constitute a problem?

 YES – Please explain why and specify which exceptions you
arereferring to

 NO– Please explain why and specify which exceptions you are
referring to

In our books we make use of the right of citation. But we never
had problems with this although our books are available
throughout Europe (and beyond).

 NO OPINION

27. In the event that limitations and exceptions established at
national level were to have cross-border effect, how should the
question of “fair compensation” be addressed, when such
compensation is part of the exception? (e.g. who pays whom,
where?)

[Open question]

In any case where someone makes use of a limitation or exception
he or she should pay for it. That is where the collection
societies come into the game. And whether the use is within one
border or over the border should not make a difference for the
author.

Access to content in libraries and archives
===========================================

Preservation and archiving
--------------------------

28. (b)[In particular if you are a right holder:]Have you
experienced problems with the use by libraries, educational
establishments, museum or archives of the preservation
exception?

 YES – Please explain, by Member State, sector, and the type
of use in question.

 NO

 NO OPINION

Off-premises access to library collections

32. (c)[In particular if you are aright holder:]Have you
negotiated agreements withinstitutional users that enable those
institutions to provide remote access, including across borders,
to the works or other subject-matter in their collections, for
purposes of research and private study?

[Open question]

As a rule we give institutions a„Campus license“ that allows
them to provide remote access for purposes of research and
private study.

We make our electronic content available through agents. For
journals that is Ingenta in the UK, and we adhere to their
standard conditions for libraries. For our E-Books there are
various aggregators like Dawsonera, Ebrary, EBSCO, MyiLibrary,
whom we instruct to make use of their usual campuswide access
scheme including remote access.

E – lending
-----------

36. (c)[In particular if you are aright holder:]Have you
negotiated agreements with libraries to enable them to lend
books or other materials electronically, including across
borders?

 YES –Please explain with specific examples

 NO

 NO OPINION

Teaching

42. (b)[In particular if you are a right holder:]Have you
experienced specific problems resulting from the way in which
works or other subject-matter are used for illustration for
teaching, including across borders?

 YES – Please explain

 NO

 NO OPINION

44. What mechanisms exist in themarket place to facilitate the
use of content for illustration for teaching purposes? How
successful are they?

[Open question]

As regards school teaching there exists here in Germany a
general agreeement between the state authorities
(Kultusministerien),the association of schoolbook publishers,
and the relevant collection societies for copies from printed
books. Digitally marketed books or parts thereof are usually
licensed by the publishers.

Research
========

47. (b)[In particular if you are a right holder:]Have you
experienced specific problems resulting from the way in which
works or other subject-matter are used in the context of
research projects/activities, including across borders?

 YES – Please explain

 NO

 NO OPINION

49. What mechanisms exist in the Member States to facilitate the
use of content for research purposes? How successful are they?
===============================================================================================================================

We do have legal procedures for this here in Germany: § 53 Abs.
2 S.1 Nr. 1 UrhG, that allows copying for personal research
purposes; and the new § 38Abs. 4 UrhG that allows the author of
a scholarly journal article to make his or her final version as
handed in for publication available if this article has been
written with public funding

We think, however, that licensing through a one-stop-shop
portalwould be preferable, especially if this leads to the
originally published version to be made available.

Disabilities

50. (c)[In particular if you are a right holder:]Have you
experienced specific problems resulting from the application of
limitationsor exceptions allowing for the
distribution/communication of works published in special
formats, including across borders?

 YES – Please explain by giving examples

 NO

 NO OPINION

52. What mechanisms exist in the market place to facilitate
accessibility to content? How successful are they?
==============================================================================================================

[Open question]

Our E-Books are fully searchable PDF's so they are generally
only readable for thos who are able to read printed books. The
underlying text cannot be extracted.

The German § 45a UrhG ensures that people with disabilities can
get access to all published works.

As most other publishers we grant licenses for free to the
rather comprehensive „Library for the blind“ to produce audio
versions and to distrubute text data to their clientele to make
use of Braille readers.

Text and data mining
====================

53. (c)[In particular if you are a right holder:]Have you
experienced specific problems resulting from the use of text
and data mining in relation to copyright protected content,
including across borders?

 YES – Please explain

 NO– Please explain

We have had no general enquiries to this end. But we supply
several content search agencies with the digital versions of
our journals. They usually get this for free, but we make sure
first that they link to the original publication thereby
protecting its authenticity.

 NO OPINION

57. Are there otherissues, unrelated to copyright, that
constitute barriers to the use of text or data mining methods?

[Open question]

From our point of view the technical standards seem to be the
main problem. This is hard (and probably costly) to solve. A
copyright exception to that end would most probably do more
harm than help.

User-generated content
======================

58. (c)[In particular if you are a right holder:]Have you
experienced problems resulting from the way the users are using
pre-existing works or other subject-matter to disseminate new
content on the Internet, including across borders?

 YES – Please explain by giving examples

 NO

 NO OPINION

Fair remuneration of authors and performers

73. Is there a need to act at the EU level (for instance to
prohibit certainclauses in contracts)?

 YES – Please explain

 NO– Please explain why

In Germany we have an „Urhebervertragsrecht“ with many rules; it
has proved to be not very practical.

For book publishers a good and steady relation to their authors
is absolutely crucial; there are almost no buy-out contracts.
For the most books with a considerable market the author gets a
percentage of the sales income; this was already the case before
the „Urhebervertragrecht“ (§ 32 UrhG) was installed.

Especially in the field oftranslations have the new rules had an
adverse effect. Because publishers cannot calculate the costs
any more they shy away from translations. This is one reason
why less translations are published now than before.

 NO OPINION

Respect for rights

75. Should the civil enforcement system in the EU be rendered
more efficient for infringements of copyright committed with a
commercial purpose?

 YES– Please explain

See answer to no. 76.

 NO – Please explain

 NO OPINION

76. In particular, is the current legal framework clear enough
to allow for sufficient involvement of intermediaries (such as
Internet service providers, advertising brokers, payment
service providers, domain name registrars, etc.) in inhibiting
online copyright infringements witha commercial purpose? If
not, what measures would be useful to foster the cooperation of
intermediaries?

[Open question]

What regards copyright infringements on the internet the main
problem is the anonymity that is possible there. This leads
inevitably to moral hazard.

Therefore a good balance between anonymity and responsibility
has to be found. This seems only possible by making the service
or host providers accountable.

77. Does the current civil enforcement framework ensure that the
right balanceis achieved between the right to have one’s
copyright respected and other rights such as the protection of
private life and protection of personal data?

 YES – Please explain

 NO– Please explain

Data protection and the respect for privacy are high goods. But
anonymity on the internet comes with a high price, see above.

Therefore there have to be rules to enforce lawful behavior.
This sounds like circling the square, and in a way it is, but
we are convinced that it has to be done somehow.

 NO OPINION

