


Public Consultation

on the review of the EU copyright rules

Contents

I.  Introduction  2

A.  Context of the consultation  2

B.  How to submit replies to this questionnaire  3

C.  Confidentiality  3

II.  Rights and the functioning of the Single Market  7

A.  Why is it not possible to access many online content
services from anywhere in Europe?  7

B.  Is there a need for more clarity as regards the scope of
what needs to be authorised (or not) in digital transmissions?
10

1.  The act of “making available”  10

2.  Two rights involved in a single act of exploitation  11

3.  Linking and browsing  12

4.  Download to own digital content  13

C.  Registration of works and other subject matter – is it a
good idea?  14

D.  How to improve the use and interoperability of identifiers
15

E.  Term of protection – is it appropriate?  15

III.  Limitations and exceptions in the Single Market  16

A.  Access to content in libraries and archives  19

1.  Preservation and archiving  19

2.  Off-premises access to library collections  20

3.  E – lending  21

4.  Mass digitisation  22

B.  Teaching  23

C.  Research  25

D.  Disabilities  25

E.  Text and data mining  27

F.  User-generated content  28

IV.  Private copying and reprography  31

V.  Fair remuneration of authors and performers  33

VI.  Respect for rights  34

VII.  A single EU Copyright Title  36

VIII.  Other issues  36

Introduction

Context of the consultation

Over the last two decades, digital technology and the Internet
have reshaped the ways in which content is created,
distributed, and accessed. New opportunities have materialised
for those that create and produce content (e.g. a film, a
novel, a song),for new and existingdistribution platforms,for
institutions such as libraries, for activities such as research
and for citizens who now expect to be able to access content –
for information, education or entertainment purposes –
regardless of geographical borders.

This new environment also presents challenges.One of themis for
the market to continue to adapt to new forms of distribution
and use.Another oneis for the legislator to ensure that the
system of rights, limitations to rights and enforcement remains
appropriate and is adapted to the new environment. This
consultation focuses on the second of these challenges:
ensuring that the EU copyright regulatory frameworkstays fit
for purpose in the digital environmentto support creation and
innovation, tap the full potential of the Single
Market,fostergrowth andinvestment in our economy
andpromotecultural diversity.

In its"Communication on Content in the Digital Single Market"1

COM (2012)789 final, 18/12/2012.

the Commission set out two parallel tracks of action:ontheone
hand, to complete its on-going effort to review and to
modernise the EU copyright legislative framework2

As announced in the Intellectual Property Strategy ' A single
market for Intellectual Property Rights: COM (2011)287 final,
24/05/2011.

3

"Based on market studies and impact assessment and legal
drafting work"as announced in the Communication (2012)789.

with a view to a decision in 2014 on whether to table
legislative reform proposals, andon the other, to facilitate
practical industry-led solutions through the stakeholder
dialogue"Licences for Europe"on issues on which rapid progress
was deemed necessary and possible.

The"Licences for Europe"process has been finalised now4

See the document “Licences for Europe – tem pledges to bring
more content
online”:http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/copyright/docs/licences-for-europe/131113_ten-pledges_en.pdf.

. The Commission welcomes the practical solutions stakeholders
have put forward in thiscontext and will monitor their
progress. Pledges have been made by stakeholders in all four
Working Groups (cross border portability of services,
user-generated content,audiovisual andfilm heritage and text
and data mining). Taken together, the Commission expects these
pledgesto bea further step in making the user environment
easier in many different situations. The Commission also takes
note of the fact that two groups –user-generated content
andtext and data mining–did not reach consensus among
participating stakeholders on either the problems to be
addressed or on the results. Thediscussions andresults
of"Licences for Europe"will be also taken into account in the
context of the review of the legislative framework.

As part of thereview process, the Commission is now launching a
public consultation onissuesidentified in the Communication on
Content in the Digital Single Market, i.e.:"territoriality in
the Internal Market, harmonisation, limitations and exceptions
to copyright in the digital age; fragmentation of the EU
copyright market; and how to improve the effectiveness and
efficiency of enforcement while underpinning its legitimacy in
the wider context of copyright reform". As highlighted in the
October 2013 European Council Conclusions5

EUCO 169/13, 24/25 October 2013.

"Providingdigital services and content across the single market
requires the establishment of a copyright regime for the
digital age. The Commission will thereforecomplete its on-going
review of the EU copyright framework in spring 2014. It is
important to modernise Europe's copyright regime and facilitate
licensing, while ensuring a high level protection of
intellectual property rights and taking into account cultural
diversity".

This consultation builds on previous consultations and public
hearings, in particular those on the"Green Paper on copyright
in the knowledge economy"6

COM(2008)
466/3,http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/copyright/copyright-infso/index_en.htm#maincontentSec2.

, the"Green Paper on the online distribution of audiovisual
works"7

COM(2011) 427
final,http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/consultations/2011/audiovisual_en.htm.

and"Content Online"8

http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/consultations/2009/content_online_en.htm.

. These consultations provided valuable feedback from
stakeholders on a number of questions,on issues as diverse as
the territoriality of copyright and possible ways to overcome
territoriality, exceptions related to the online dissemination
of knowledge, and rightholders’ remuneration, particularly in
the audiovisual sector. Views were expressed by stakeholders
representing all stages in the value chain, including right
holders, distributors, consumers, and academics. The questions
elicited widely diverging views on the best way to proceed. The
"Green Paper on Copyright in the Knowledge Economy" was followed
up by a Communication. The replies to the "Green Paper on the
online distribution of audiovisual works" have fed into
subsequent discussions on the Collective Rights Management
Directive and into the current review process.

How to submit replies to this questionnaire

You are kindly asked to send your repliesby5February 2014as a
word or pdf documenttothefollowinge-mail address of DG Internal
Market and Services:markt-copyright-consultation@ec.europa.eu.
Please note that replies sentafterthat date will not be taken
into account.

This consultation is addressed to different categories of
stakeholders. To the extent possible, the questions indicate
the category/ies of respondents most likely to be concerned by
them (annotation in brackets, before the actual question).
Respondents should nevertheless feel free to reply to any/all
of the questions. Also, please note that, apart from the
question concerning the identification of the respondent, none
of the questions is obligatory. Replies containing answers only
to part of the questions will be also accepted.

You are requested toprovideyour answers directlywithin
thisconsultation document. For the“Yes/No/No
opinion”questionsplease put the selected answer
inboldandunderlineit so it is easy for us to see your
selection.

In your answers to the questions, you are invited to refer to
the situation in EUMember States.You are also invited in
particular to indicate, where relevant, what would be the
impact of options you put forward in terms of costs,
opportunities and revenues.

The public consultation is available in English.
Responsesmay,however,be sent in any of the 24officiallanguages
of the EU.

Confidentiality

The contributions received in this round of consultation as well
as asummary reportpresenting theresponsesin a statistical and
aggregated formwill be published on the website of DG MARKT.

Please note that all contributions received will be published
together with the identity of the contributor, unless the
contributor objects to the publication of their personal data
on thegrounds that such publication would harm his or her
legitimate interests. In this case, the contribution will be
published in anonymous form upon the contributor's explicit
request. Otherwise the contribution will not be published nor
will its content be reflected in the summary report.

Pleaseread ourPrivacy statement.

Please identify yourself:

Name:

Danish Publishers Association

Themembers of the Danish Publishers Association
(DPA)representapprox. 85 % of the turnover of Danish Publishers
publishing within fiction, non-fiction and school- and
textbooks.

Book publishing is the largest cultural industry in Europe; it
generates around 23 billion € of net revenues per year, for a
retail market value of about 40 billion €. Book publishing is a
very valuable asset for Europe, which is the global leader in
this sector; all EU policies should take into account its
potential for jobs and growth generation.

Reading a book is the second most common activity according to
theEU Special Eurobarometers report on “Cultural Access and
participation”9

http://ec.europa.eu/public_opinion/archives/ebs/ebs_399_en.pdf,
page 5

with 68% of people reading books.Reading books by an author from
another European country is the most common form of engaging
with another country’s culture and the most accessible one
according to the same report (31%)10

Ibid. page 38

.It is also a sector that employs directly at least half a
million people across Europe (from authors, to publishers to
independent booksellers). According to Eurostat, about 300 000
people are directly employed in publishing. All this does not
count all the indirect jobs of graphic design, translators,
printers, etc.

Publishinglikeany other sector of the cultural
industries,needscopyrightasa reliable and stablelegislative
tool that ensures the protection of creation and recouping of
investments, thus allowing perpetuating the process of creation
and reinvestment.

In the interests of transparency, organisations (including, for
example, NGOs, trade associations and commercial enterprises)
are invited to provide the public with relevant information
about themselves by registering in the Interest Representative
Register and subscribing to its Code of Conduct.

If you are a Registered organisation, please indicate your
Register ID number below. Your contribution will then be
considered as representing the views of your organisation.

If your organisation is not registered, you have the opportunity
toregister now.Responses from organisations not registered will
be published separately.

If you would like to submit your reply on an anonymous basis
please indicate it belowby underlining the following answer:

Yes, I would like to submit my reply on an anonymous basis

Type of respondent(Pleaseunderlinethe appropriate):

End user/consumer(e.g.internet user,reader, subscriber to
musicor audiovisualservice, researcher,student)ORRepresentative
of end users/consumers

for the purposes of this questionnaire normally referred to
in questions as"end users/consumers"

Institutional user(e.g. school,university, research centre,
library, archive)ORRepresentative of institutional users

for the purposes of this questionnaire normally referred to
in questions as"institutional users"

Author/Performer OR Representative of authors/performers

Publisher/Producer/Broadcaster ORRepresentative of
publishers/producers/broadcasters

the two above categoriesare,for the purposes of this
questionnaire, normally referred to in questions as"right
holders"

Intermediary/Distributor/Other service provider(e.g. online
music or audiovisual service, games platform,social media,
search engine, ICT industry)OR Representative of
intermediaries/distributors/other service providers

for the purposes of this questionnaire normally referred to
in questionsas"service providers"

Collective Management Organisation

Public authority

Member State

Other(Please explain):

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Rights and the functioning of the Single Market

Why is it not possible to accessmany online content servicesfrom
anywhere in Europe?[The territorial scope of the rights involved
in digital transmissions and the segmentation of the market
through licensing agreements]

Holders of copyright and related rights – e.g. writers, singers,
musicians - do not enjoy a single protection in the EU. Instead,
they are protected on the basis of a bundle of national rights
in each Member State. Those rights have been largely harmonised
by the existing EU Directives. However, differences remain and
the geographical scope of the rights is limited to the
territory of the Member State granting them.Copyright is thus
territorial in the sense that rights are acquired and enforced
on a country-by-country basis under national law11

This principle has been confirmed by the Court of justice on
several occasions.

.

The dissemination of copyright-protected content on the Internet
– e.g. by a music streaming service, or by an online e-book
seller – therefore requires, in principle, an authorisation for
each national territory in which the content is communicated to
the public. Rightholders are, of course, in a position to grant
a multi-territorial or pan-European licence, such that content
services can be provided in several Member States and across
borders.A number of stepshave beentaken at EU level to
facilitate multi-territoriallicences: the proposal for a
Directive on Collective Rights Management12

Proposalfor a Directiveof the European Parliament and of the
Councilof 11 July 2012 on collective management of copyright
and related rights and multi-territorial licensing of rights in
musical works for online uses in the internal market, COM(2012)
372 final.

should significantly facilitate the delivery of
multi-territorial licences in musical worksfor online
services13

CollectiveManagementOrganisations play a significant role inthe
management of online rights for musical works in contrastto
thesituation where online rights are licenseddirectly by right
holders such asfilm or record producers or by newspaper or book
publishers.

;the structured stakeholder dialogue “Licences for Europe”14

You can find more information on the following website:
http://ec.europa.eu/licences-for-europe-dialogue/.

and market-led developments such as the on-going work in the
Linked Content Coalition15

You can find more information on the following
website:http://www.linkedcontentcoalition.org/.

.

"Licences for Europe" addressed in particular the specific issue
of cross-border portability, i.e. the ability of consumers
having subscribed to online services in their Member State to
keep accessing them when travelling temporarily to other Member
States. As a result, representatives of the audio-visual sector
issued a joint statement affirming their commitment to continue
working towards the further development of cross-border
portability16

See the document “Licences for Europe – tem pledges to bring
more content
online”:http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/copyright/docs/licences-for-europe/131113_ten-pledges_en.pdf.

.

Despite progress, there are continued problems with the
cross-border provision of, and access to, services. These
problems are most obvious to consumers wanting to access
services that are made available in Member States other than
the one in which they live. Not all online services are
available in all Member States and consumers face problems when
trying to access such services across borders. In some
instances, even if the “same” service is available in all
Member States, consumers cannot access the service across
borders (they can only access their “national” service, and if
they try to access the "same" service in another Member State
they are redirected to the one designated for their country of
residence).

This situation may in part stem from the territoriality of
rights and difficulties associated with the clearing of rights
in different territories. Contractual clauses in licensing
agreements between right holders and distributors and/or
between distributors and end users may also be at the origin of
some of the problems (denial of access, redirection).

The main issue at stake here is, therefore, whether further
measures (legislative or non-legislative, including market-led
solutions) need to be taken at EU level in the medium term17

For possible long term measures such as the establishment of
aEuropean Copyright Code(establishinga single title) see
section VII of this consultation document.

to increase the cross-border availability of content services in
the Single Market, while ensuring an adequate level of
protection for right holders.

[In particular if you are an end user/consumer:]Have you faced
problems whentryingto access online services in an EU Member
State other than the one in which you live?

YES- Please provide examples indicating the Member State, the
sector and the type of content concerned (e.g. premium content
such as certain films and TV series, audio-visual content in
general, music, e-books, magazines, journals and newspapers,
games, applications and other software)

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO

NO OPINION

[In particular if you area service provider:]Have you faced
problems when seeking to provide online services across
bordersin the EU?

YES - Please explain whether such problems, in your
experience, are related to copyright or to other issues (e.g.
business decisions relating to the cost of providing services
across borders, compliance with other laws such as consumer
protection)? Please provide examples indicating the Member
State, the sector and the type of content concerned (e.g.
premium content such as certain films and TV series,
audio-visual content in general, music, e-books, magazines,
journals and newspapers, games, applications and other
software).

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO

NO OPINION

[In particular if you area right holder or acollective
management organisation:]Howoftenare youaskedtogrant
multi-territorial licences?Pleaseindicate, if possible, the
number of requests per yearand provide examples indicating the
Member State, the sector and the type of content concerned.

[Open question]

In the book sector, the issue of territoriality is fundamentally
different from other sectors.The authorgrantsalicensedirectly to
the publisher for the commercial exploitation of awork.Danish
publishers acquire and manage worldwide exclusive rights for
books inDanish.For example, a Danishpublisher can sell the book
inDanishto readers all over Europe(and the world)because no
other publisher will get alicencefor the same language.As a
result, publishers can sell books through online or
brick-and-mortar retailers, across the whole internal market
without limitations.

Forsales ofboth physical books and e-books the current practice
is individual management of rights, as European publishers
generally acquire digital as wellas analoguerights.As far as
copyright management is concerned, any European reader should
therefore be able to buy anye-book sold by
anye-distributor.Possible obstacles encountered by European
citizens derive from other issues (see answer to question 5).

If you have identified problems in the answers to any of the
questions above – what would be the best way to tackle them?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

[In particular if you area right holder or acollective
management organisation:]Are there reasons why, even in cases
where you hold all the necessary rights for all the territories
in question, you would still find it necessary or justified to
impose territorial restrictions on a service provider (in
order, for instance, to ensure that access to certain content
is not possible in certain European countries)?

YES– Please explain by giving examples

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO

NO OPINION

[In particular if you aree.g. a broadcasteror a service
provider:]Are there reasons why, even in cases where you have
acquired all the necessary rights for all the territories in
question, you would still find it necessary or justified to
impose territorial restrictions on the service recipient (in
order for instance, to redirect the consumer to a different
website than the one he is trying to access)?

 YES – Please explain by giving examples

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO

 NO OPINION

Do you think that further measures (legislative or
non-legislative, including market-led solutions) are needed at
EU level to increase the cross-border availability of content
services in the Single Market, while ensuring an adequate level
ofprotection for right holders?

YES – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO– Please explain

DPAdoes not expect particular legislative measures in the
copyright field to be required at EU level to increase
cross-border availability of books in analogue and digital
formats within the single market. However, we would like to
encourage the Commission to support us in finding technical
solutions to identify the country of sale for VAT purposes (see
question 5), to enhance the discoverability of e-books and also
with regard to the interoperability of devices, platforms and
content.

NO OPINION

Is there a need for more clarity as regards the scope of what
needs to be authorised (or not) in digital transmissions?[The
definition of the rights involved in digital transmissions]

The EU framework for the protection of copyright and related
rights in the digital environment is largely established by
Directive 2001/29/EC18

Directive 2001/29/EC of the European Parliament and of the
Council of 22 May 2001 on the harmonisation of certain aspects
of copyright and related rights in the information society.

on the harmonisation of certain aspects of copyright and related
rights in the information society. OtherEUdirectives in this
field that are relevant in the online environment are those
relating to the protection of software19

Directive 2009/24/EC of the European Parliament and of the
Council of 23 April 2009 on the legal protection of computer
programs.

and databases20

Directive 96/9/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council
of 11 March 1996 on the legal protection of databases.

.

Directive 2001/29/ECharmonisestherights of authors and
neighbouring rightholders21

Film and record producers, performers and broadcasters are
holders of so-called “neighbouring rights” in, respectively,
their films, records, performances and broadcast. Authors’
content protected by copyright is referred to as a “work” or
“works”, while content protected by neighbouring rights is
referred to as “other subject matter”.

which are essential for thetransmission of digital copiesof
works(e.g. an e-book)and other protected subject matter(e.g. a
record in a MP3 format)over the internet or similar digital
networks.

The mostrelevantrightsfor digital transmissionsarethe
reproduction right, i.e. the right to authorise or prohibit the
making of copies22

The right to “authorise or prohibit direct or indirect,
temporary or permanent reproduction by any means and in any
form, in whole or in part” (see Art. 2 of Directive 2001/29/EC)
although temporary acts of reproduction of a transient or
incidental nature are, under certain conditions, excluded (see
art. 5(1) of Directive 2001/29/EC).

,(notablyrelevant at the start of the transmission –e.g. the
uploading ofadigital copy of a work to a serverin view ofmaking
it available–andat the users’ end– e.g. when a user downloads
a digital copy of a work)and the communication to the
public/making available right, i.e. the rights to authorise or
prohibit the dissemination of the works in digital networks23

The right to authorise or prohibit any communication to the
public by wire or wireless means and to authorise or prohibit
the making available to the public “on demand” (seeArt. 3 of
Directive 2001/29/EC).

.These rightsare intrinsically linked in digital
transmissionsandboth need to be cleared.

The act of “making available”

Directive 2001/29/EC specifiesneitherwhatis covered bythe making
available right(e.g. the upload,the accessibility by the
public,theactualreception by the public)norwherethe act of
“making available” takes place. This does not raise questions
if the act is limited to a single territory. Questions arise
however when the transmission covers several territories and
rights need to be cleared (does the act of "making available"
happen in the country of the upload only? in each of the
countries where the content is potentially accessible? in each
of the countries where thecontent is effectively accessed?).The
most recent case law of the Court of Justice of the European
Union (CJEU)suggests that a relevant criterion is
the“targeting” of a certainMember State'spublic24

See in particularCase C-173/11(Football Dataco vs Sportradar)
andCase C-5/11 (Donner) for copyright and related rights, and
Case C-324/09 (L’Oréal vs eBay) for trademarks. With regard to
jurisdiction seealso joined Cases C-585/08 and C-144/09 (Pammer
and Hotel Alpenhof)andpending CaseC-441/13 (Pez Hejduk);
seehowever,adopting a different approach, CaseC-170/12
(Pinckney vs KDG Mediatech).

. According to this approachthecopyright-relevant act(which has
to be licensed) occurs at leastin those countries which are
“targeted” by the online service provider.A service provider
“targets” a group of customers residing in a specific country
when it directs its activity to that group, e.g. via
advertisement, promotions, a language or a currency
specifically targeted at that group.

Isthe scope of the“making available”right in cross-border
situations – i.e. when content is disseminated across borders
–sufficiently clear?

 YES

An application of the country of origin principle would have
negative effect if introduced relating to the “making
available” or any other exclusive right of copyright, as it
would weaken its usefulness. The making available right is most
useful when an infringement can be brought against a party who
does not make an unauthorised reproduction in a particular
territory (but very often) has done so or assisted or
facilitated the making of a copy in another jurisdiction. The
making available right is also useful in that the exceptions
from copyright infringement in relation to the reproduction
right are not co-extensive with the exceptions from
infringement relatingto the making available right.

NO–Pleaseexplain how this could be clarified and what
typeofclarification would be required(e.g.as in "targeting"
approach explained above,as in "country of origin"approach25

The objective of implementing a “country of origin”approachis to
localise the copyright relevant act that must be licenced in a
single Member State (the "country of origin", which could be
for example the Member State in whichthe content is uploaded or
wherethe service provider is established), regardless of in how
many Member States the work canbe accessed or received. Such an
approachhas already been introduced at EU level with regard to
broadcasting by satellite(seeDirective 93/83/EEC on the
coordination of certain rules concerning copyright and rights
related to copyright applicable to satellite broadcasting and
cable retransmission).

)

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO OPINION

[In particular if you are a right holder:]Could a clarification
of the territorial scope of the “making available” right have
an effect on the recognition of your rights (e.g. whether you
are considered to be an author or not, whether you are
considered to have transferred your rights or not),onyour
remuneration, oron the enforcement of rights (including the
availability of injunctive relief26

Injunctive relief is a temporary or permanent remedy allowing
the right holder to stop or prevent an infringement of his/her
right.

)?

YES – Please explain howsuchpotential effectscould
beaddressed

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO

DPAdoes not believe a clarification of the territorial scope of
the making available needs clarification. The “lex loci
protectionis” conflict of law rule for copyright provides
adequate means to enforce copyright. For criminal matters, a
greater cooperation in the Internal Market would be helpful.

NO OPINION

Two rights involved in a single act of exploitation

Each act of transmission in digital networks entails(in the
current state of technology and law) several reproductions.This
means that there are two rights that apply to digital
transmissions: the reproduction right and the making available
right. Thismay complicate the licensing of works for online
usenotably whenthetwo rights are held by different
persons/entities.

[In particular if youa service provider or a right holder:]Does
the application of two rights to a single act of economic
exploitation in the online environment (e.g. a download) create
problems for you?

YES – Please explainwhat type of measureswould be needed in
order to address such problems (e.g. facilitation of joint
licences when the rights are in different hands,legislation to
achieve the "bundling of rights")

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO

This is not applicabletothe print sector where
publishersgenerallyacquire all rights which are fully
transferred to him by the author(s)for commercial exploitation.
Publishers hold rights for reproduction and distribution. We
therefore do not see any need for legislation in that respectas
in our field the two distinct rights do not create any problem.

NO OPINION

Linking and browsing

Hyperlinks are references to data that lead a user from one
location in the Internet to another. They are indispensable for
the functioning of the Internet as a network. Several cases are
pending before the CJEU27

Cases C-466/12 (Svensson), C-348/13 (Bestwater International)
and C-279/13 (C More entertainment).

in which the question has been raised whether the provision of
a clickable link constitutes an act of communication to the
public/making available to the public subject to the
authorisation of the rightholder.

A user browsing the internet (e.g. viewing a web-page) regularly
creates temporary copies of works and other subject-matter
protected under copyright on the screen and in the 'cache'
memory of his computer. A question has been referred to the
CJEU28

Case C-360/13 (Public Relations Consultants Association Ltd).See
alsohttp://www.supremecourt.gov.uk/decided-cases/docs/UKSC_2011_0202_PressSummary.pdf.

as to whether such copies are always covered by the mandatory
exception for temporary acts of reproduction provided for in
Article 5(1) of Directive 2001/29/EC.

Should the provision of a hyperlink leading to a work or other
subject matter protected under copyright,either in generalor
under specific circumstances,besubject to the authorisation of
the rightholder?

 YES–Please explain whether you consider this to be the case
in general, or under specificcircumstances, and why

 NO– Please explainwhether you consider this to be the case
in general,or under specific circumstances, and why(e.g.
because it does not amount to an act of communication to the
public – or to a new public, or because it should be covered by
a copyright exception)

Hyperlink per say should not be considered as making available
when the link leads toan authorised copy of a work or other
subject matter. They therefore should not be subject to the
prior approvalprovided that therightsholderis entitled to set
restrictions on access to the materials at the end of the
link.However, in cases where the link leads to illegally made
available material or tocopyright material not previously made
available to the public, as it iswith pirate sites offering
link collections, then they should be covered by the making
available right.Automated restrictions on access such as
prohibitions on crawling must be followed by search engines, or
the search engines will be deemed infringers and/or contributory
infringers.More generally,DPAis able to endorse the views and
conclusions expressed in a report of ALAI, available at:
http://www.alai.org/en/assets/files/resolutions/making-available-right-report-opinion.pdf

 NO OPINION

Should the viewing of a web-page where this impliesthetemporary
reproduction of a work or other subject matter protected under
copyrighton the screen and in thecache memory of the user’s
computer,either in general or under specific circumstances, be
subject to the authorisation of the rightholder?

 YES – Please explainwhether you consider this to be the case
in general, or under specific circumstances, and why

 NO– Please explainwhether you consider this to be the case
in general,or under specific circumstances, andwhy(e.g. because
it isor should be covered by a copyright exception)

The actual viewing of a page (from a user’s perspective) should
not be subject to authorisation when it involves truly an act
of temporary reproduction as a necessary technical process and
leads to an authorised content made lawfully available online.
However, the making available of copyright protected content on
a webpage so that internet users can view it can and should only
be done under authorisation of rightsholders.Illegal display of
pdf on websites and illegal streaming constitutes an increasing
form of piracy of e-books, which becomes even more crucial at a
time when services are being created where a book can be
accessed on subscription such as Skoobe or Paper C in
Germany.Moreover, rightsholdersshould be able to decide whether
a work is available for indexingby search machines for example
when the cache is being madeor notand whether precise
contractual terms allow to do so with the reader in clear way.

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO OPINION

Download to own digital content

Digital content is increasinglybeing boughtvia
digitaltransmission(e.g. download to own). Questions arise as
to the possibility forusersto dispose of the filesthey buy in
this manner(e.g. by selling themor by giving them as a gift).
The principle of EU exhaustion of the distribution right
applies in the case of the distribution ofphysical copies (e.g.
when a tangible article such as a CD or a book, etc. is sold,
the right holder cannot prevent the further distribution of
that tangible article)29

See also recital 28 of Directive 2001/29/EC.

. The issue that arises here is whether this principle can also
be applied in the case of an act of transmission equivalent in
its effect to distribution (i.e. where the buyer acquires the
property of the copy)30

In Case C-128/11 (Oracle vs. UsedSoft) the CJEU ruled that an
author cannot oppose the resale of a second-hand licence that
allows downloading his computer program from his website and
using it for an unlimited period of time. The exclusive right
of distribution of a copy of a computer program covered by such
a licence is exhausted on its first sale.While it is thus
admitted that the distribution right may be subject to
exhaustion in case of computer programs offered for download
with the right holder’s consent, the Court was careful to
emphasise that it reached this decision based on the Computer
Programs Directive. It was stressed that this exhaustion rule
constituted alex specialisin relation to the Information
Society Directive (UsedSoft, par. 51, 56).

. This raises difficult questions, notably relating to the
practical application of such an approach (how to
avoidre-sellers keepingand usinga copy ofawork afterthey have
“re-sold” it – this is often referred to as the “forward and
delete” question) as well as to theeconomic implications of the
creation of a second-hand market of copies of perfect quality
that never deteriorate (in contrast to the second-hand market
for physical goods).

[In particular if you arean end user/consumer:]Haveyou
facedrestrictions when trying to reselldigital files that you
havepurchased (e.g.mp3 file,e-book)?

YES–Please explainby giving examples

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO

NO OPINION

[In particular if you area right holder or a service provider:]
What would bethe consequencesof providing a legal framework
enabling the resale of previously purchased digital content?
Please specify per market (type of content) concerned.

[Open question]

As recognised in this consultation, the ability to resell of
previously purchased digital content would have severe economic
implications on the book sector.

Such an approach which introduces the concept of exhaustion to
the right of distribution when distribution takes place by
transmission fails to recognise the inherent differences in
physical and digital products. Specifically, the nature of
digital is such that quality remains perfect over time, in
contrast to physical goods where there is a degree of
deterioration over time. The second hand market for physical
goods therefore has less of an impact of the primary market,
which can still function alongside a secondary market. By
contrast, with digital products the lack of deterioration in
quality means that a secondary market directly competes with
the primary market and inevitably undermines it. There would be
no reason for any reader to pay for a new e-book if the
identical file was available second hand at a lower price.

Further, it is impossible to determine whether a digital good
has been sold; unlike a physical sale where there is a transfer
to another user and the denial of the continuing use of the
physical good by the seller, in the digital environment this is
not the case – both the seller and purchaser can continue to use
the digital product. The implications for widespread copyright
infringement – and concurrent difficulties in enforcement – are
obvious.

As a result, we can realistically foresee negative effects that
could stem from the exhaustion rule applied to e-books such as
the costs of e-books which will drastically raise and which
will not be a benefit for the readers or publishers and authors
alike or the fact that publishers who currently use
consumer-friendly social DRM (watermarks) to start using hard
DRMs to protect their works.

Applying the principle of exhaustion to digital products would
also stymie the development of new business modelsand it is
hard to foresee that the exhaustion rule applied to electronic
content would be compliant with the three-step-test of the
Berne convention.

This idea is also based on a wide-spread false apprehension of
the fact that e-books are cheaper than paper books.
E-booksarein factnot much cheaper to produce than print books;
we estimate that digital production allows savings of about
15-20% (printing, storage and distribution) – everything else
(paying authors, editorial, marketing, etc) is still there in
digital. In any event, only a tiny marginal proportion of
publishers only publish e-books, almost all publishers need to
publish in paper and in digital form, so the reduction of
costs, for a market that is no more than 1% in the majority of
Member Statesis not significant at all(the UK is an exception
with 15% market share of e-books,France, Italy, Spain,
Denmarkand Germany between 2 to 3%but most of the countries
across the EU arecounting less than 1%).Moreover, the digital
market is still so nascent that there are stillbig initial
investments needed to move to digital.So all in all for the
time being producing e-books costs about the same, if not more.

Registration of works and other subject matter – is it a good
idea?

Registration is not often discussed in copyright in the EU as
the existing international treaties in the area prohibit
formalities as a condition for theprotection and
exerciseofrights. However,this prohibition is not absolute31

For example, it does not affect “domestic” works – i.e.works
originating inthe country imposing the formalitiesas opposed to
works originating inanothercountry.

.Moreover a system of registration does not need to be made
compulsory or constitute a precondition for the protection and
exercise of rights.With a longer term of protection and with
the increased opportunities that digital technology
providesfortheuse of content(includingolder works and works
that otherwise wouldnot havebeen disseminated),the advantages
and disadvantages of a system of registrationare increasingly
being considered32

On the basis of Article 3.6 of the Directive 2012/28/EU of the
European Parliament and of the Council of 25 October 2012 on
certain permitted uses of orphan works, a publicly accessible
online database is currently being set up by the Office
forHarmonisation of theInternalMarket (OHIM)for the
registration of orphan works.

.

Would the creation of a registration system at EU level help in
the identification and licensing of works and other subject
matter?

YES

NO

The book publishing sectoralready hasa registration system for
the identification of books(ISBN), works (ISTC), and party
names (ISNI), which is what is needed to help in the
identification also for licencing purposes (cf.The LCC
Principles of Identification
v1.0​​​,www.linkedcontentcoalition.org/home_page.html#!documents/cvjv)..The
book industry was the first cultural sector to create an
international standard to identify a books with the ISBN, which
was introducedin 1965and now applies also to e-books and
educational software. This is a system of registration
indispensable tothe book value chain.Therefore,European
publishersdo not believe that any additional system of
registration needs to be created and applied to the publishing
sector. We also reject the notion that registration should be a
prerequisite for the protection and exercise of rights.

The new environment is challenging in this area, since it
requires standards for identification, description (to
facilitate retrieval in the Internet) and formats, to ensure
interoperability between different devices. European publishers
are actively committed to the development of open standards
along the production chain, including identification (ISBN,
ISTC), metadata (ONIX), web resolution (DOI) and – very
important for e-book portability – digital format (.epub).
Dialogue with other players along the book value chain will be
essential for full deployment of such standards.

The identification and licensing of works and other subject
matter is better served by improvements in facilitating
discoverability; and in the streamlining of licensing.
Publishers are working to improve both of these, at national
and European level.

NO OPINION

What would bethe possible advantagesof such a system?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

What would bethe possible disadvantagesof such a system?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

What incentives forregistrationbyrightholderscould be envisaged?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

How to improve theuse andinteroperability ofidentifiers

There are many private databases of works and other subject
matter held by producers, collective management organisations,
and institutions such as libraries, which are based to
a greater or lesser extent on the use of (more or less)
interoperable, internationally agreed ‘identifiers’.
Identifiers can be compared to a reference number embedded in a
work, are specific to the sector in which they have been
developed33

E.g. the International Standard Recording Code (ISRC) is used to
identify recordings, the International Standard Book Number
(ISBN) is used to identify books.

, and identify, variously, the work itself, the owner or the
contributor to a work or other subject matter. There are
notable examples of where industry is undertaking actions to
improve the interoperability of such identifiers and databases.
The Global Repertoire Database34

You will find more information about this initiative on the
following website:http://www.globalrepertoiredatabase.com/.

should, once operational, provide a single source of information
on the ownership and control of musical works worldwide. The
Linked Content Coalition35

You will find more information about this initiative(funded in
part by the European Commission)on the following website:
www.linkedcontentcoalition.org.

was established to develop building blocks for the expression
and management of rights and licensing across all content and
media types. It includes the development of a Rights Reference
Model (RRM) – a comprehensive data model for all types of
rights in all types of content. The UK Copyright Hub36

You will find more information about this initiative on the
following website:http://www.copyrighthub.co.uk/.

is seeking to take such identification systems a step further,
and to create a linked platform, enabling automated licensing
across different sectors.

What should be the role of the EU in promoting the adoption
of identifiers in the content sector, and in promoting the
development and interoperability of rights ownership and
permissions databases?

[Open question]

DPAsupports the Linked Content Coalition (LCC) and its valuable
work to create tools for right information management in any
licensing activity.While respecting national preferences in
adoptingmodels, the EU may contribute through encouraging
possible pan-European application or interlinking with other
similar initiatives. A significant first initiative toimplement
the LCC framework is Rights Data Integration, a European
Commission supported project.

The European Publishers Association (FEP) to which DPA is a
memberis one of the driving forces behind ARROW, which isa tool
to facilitate rights information management in any digitisation
project involving text and image based works.TheARROWRights
Information Infrastructureis based on standard identification
systems to supportthe process of identification of authors,
publishers and other right holders of a work,
includingdeterminingwhether it is orphan, in or out of
copyright orits commercial availability status. In this, it is
based on the same principle than LCC.

We believe that supporting technological and business innovation
in this field is a much more effective policy than introducing
new pieces of legislation. In particular, registration systems
in the field should remain voluntary and independent
(self-regulating) since they demonstrated over the time to be
more efficient.

FEP took part actively in Working Group 2 within “Licenses for
Europe”, especially with regard to the micro-licensing strand
(previously small scale users) and signed a toolkit for
licensing including micro-licensing for the text and image
sector. In this context, we encourage both:

-Solutions for the identification of authors and publishers,
their agents or other representatives (such as CMOs) from whom
permission can be sought;

-Solutions to give users information about licensing and
licensing conditions: how the licensing process works and what
users can do with a work under a chosen licence.

Term of protection – is it appropriate?

Works and other subject matter are protected under copyright for
a limited period of time. After the term of protection has
expired, a work falls into the public domain and can be freely
used by anyone (in accordance with the applicable national
rules on moral rights). The Berne Convention37

Berne Convention for the Protection of Literary and Artistic
Works,http://www.wipo.int/treaties/en/ip/berne/.

requires a minimum term of protection of 50 years after the
death of the author. The EU rules extend this term of
protection to 70 years after the death of the author (as do
many other countries, e.g. the US).

With regard to performers in the music sector and phonogram
producers, the term provided for in the EU rules also extend 20
years beyond what is mandated in international agreements,
providing for a term of protection of 70 years after the first
publication. Performers and producers in the audio-visual
sector, however, do not benefit from such an extended term of
protection.

Are the current terms of copyright protection still appropriate
in the digital environment?

 YES– Please explain

We believe the current terms of copyright are still appropriate.
Book publishers do not benefit from a copyright term of
protection but acquire rights from their author(s) for
acertainperiod or the length of the author copyright term. The
author(s) in turnreceive(s)royaltiesforthe exploitation of
his(their) work.Intellectual property is a fundamental right
which like other property should be passed to the owner’s
heirs, at least for one generation and there is no reason, be
economic or philosophical, to deprive an author from this right
in the digitalenvironment. This is based on a false assumption
that the creativity input and dissemination effort would be
less in the digital context.A reduction of the term of
protection couldalsobe detrimental for the exploitation of a
work as often authors need to wait the publication of more than
one work before knowing some commercial success oroften meet
success at alaterstagefollowing a price or a film made from
their book.We must therefore assure that both the authors and
their publishers are able to enjoy return on investment on the
book if commercial success comes at a later stage.

NO – Please explain if they should be longer or shorter

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO OPINION

Limitations and exceptions in the Single Market

Limitations and exceptions to copyright and related rights
enable the use of works and other protected subject-matter,
without obtaining authorisation from the rightholders, for
certain purposes and to a certain extent (for instance the use
for illustration purposes of an extract from a novel by a
teacher in a literature class). At EU level theyare established
in a number of copyright directives, most notably
Directive2001/29/EC38

Plus Directive 96/9/ECon the legal protection of
databases;Directive 2009/24/ECon the legal protection of
computer programs,and Directive 92/100/ECon rental right and
lending right.

.

Exceptions and limitations in the national and EU copyright laws
have to respect international law39

Article 9(2) of the Berne Convention for the Protection of
Literary and Artistic Works (1971); Article 13 of the TRIPS
Agreement (Trade Related Intellectual Property Rights) 1994;
Article 16(2) of the WIPO Performers and Phonograms Treaty
(1996); Article 9(2) of the WIPO Copyright Treaty (1996).

. In accordance with international obligations, the EU acquis
requires that limitations and exceptions can only be applied in
certain special cases which do not conflict with a normal
exploitation of the work or other subject matter and do not
unreasonably prejudice the legitimate interest of the
rightholders.

Whereas thecatalogueof limitations and exceptions included
inEUlawis exhaustive(no other exceptions can be applied to the
rights harmonised at EU level)40

Other than the grandfathering of the exceptions of minor
importance for analogue uses existing in Member States at the
time of adoption ofDirective 2001/29/EC(see, Art. 5(3)(o)).

, these limitations and exceptions areoftenoptional41

With the exception ofcertain limitations: (i)in the Computer
Programs Directive,(ii) in the Database Directive,(iii) Article
5(1) in theDirective 2001/29/ECand(iv) the OrphanWorksDirective.

,in the sense thatMember Statesare free to reflect in national
legislation as many or as few of them as they wish.Moreover,the
formulation of certain of the limitations andexceptionsis
general enough to give significantflexibility totheMember
States as to how,and to what extent,toimplement them (if they
decide to do so). Finally,it is worth noting that not all of
the limitationsand exceptionsincluded in the EUlegal framework
for copyrightare of equivalent significance in policy terms and
in terms of their potential effect on the functioning of the
Single Market.

Inaddition, inthe same manner that the definition of the rights
is territorial (i.e. has an effect only within the territory of
the Member State), the definition of the limitations and
exceptions to the rights is territorial too (so an act that is
covered by an exception in a Member State "A"may still require
the authorisation of the rightholder once we move to the Member
State "B")42

Only theexception established in therecent Orphan Works
Directive(a mandatory exceptionto copyright and related rights
in the case where the rightholders are not known or cannot be
located) has been givena cross-border effect, which means that,
for instance, once a literary work – for instance a novel – is
considered an orphan work in a Member State, that same
novelshall be considered an orphan work in all Member Statesand
can beused and accessed in all Member States.

.

The cross-bordereffectoflimitations andexceptionsalsoraises the
question of fair compensation of rightholders.In some
instances,Member States are obliged to compensate rightholders
for theharm inflicted on them bya limitation orexceptionto
their rights. In other instancesMember Statesare not obliged,
butmay decide,to provide for such compensation.If a limitation
or exception triggering a mechanism of fair compensation were
to be given cross-border effect (e.g. the books are used for
illustration in an online course given by an university in
a Member State "A" and the students are in a Member State "B")
then there would also be a need to clarifywhich national law
shoulddeterminethe level of that compensation and who should
pay it.

Finally, the question of flexibility and adaptability is being
raised: what is the best mechanism to ensure that the EU and
Member States’ regulatory frameworks adapt when necessary
(either to clarify that certain uses are covered by an
exception or to confirm that for certain uses the authorisation
of rightholders is required)? The main question here is whether
a greater degree of flexibility can be introduced in the EU and
Member States regulatory framework while ensuring the required
legal certainty, including for the functioning of the Single
Market, and respecting the EU's international obligations.

Are there problems arising from the fact that most limitations
and exceptions provided in the EUcopyright directivesare
optionalfor the Member States?

YES – Please explain by referring to specific cases

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO– Please explain

We do not see any specific problems arising from the fact that
most limitations and exceptions are optional for the Member
States.There is no reason to distinguish amongst them and make
some of them “compulsory”.Exceptions for public interest are
implemented in virtually all Member States, and the system of
optional exceptions allows the flexibility required by
differences in national culture and traditions.

The reason whyDirective2001/29/EC does not provide an exhaustive
list of mandatory exceptions is because Europe had to take into
account the cultural traditions of 15 different Member States
(now it would be 28) and the discussions on the Copyright
Directive generated unprecedented debate. Nevertheless,
differences between national copyright laws are by no
meansanobstacle to the creation of an online market for the
publishing sector, which is intrinsically divided in linguistic
areas.For instance, publishers themselves frequently rely on the
exception for quotation, including for cross-border uses, and
they have never been challenged.Indeed, the sector is hampered
more by factors such aslabourlaws or lack of harmonisation of
taxation. Therelevantobstacleto the online market is the threat
of illegal downloading which prevents legal offersfrombeing
marketed on a level playing-field.Wehaven’tseenevidence that a
harmonised set of exceptions would bring proven benefit without
harming the current publishing market.

NO OPINION

Should some/all of the exceptions be made mandatory and, if so,
is there aneed for a higher level of harmonisation of such
exceptions?

YES–Please explain byreferringto specific cases

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO–Please explain

As explained in question 21, wedisagree with the idea that some
or all exceptions should be made mandatory.The fact that they
are optional leaves room for the right amount of flexibility so
needed in a fast changing environment. Conditions of use of
right are better served both for the users and the rightholders
when handled through licence agreements, which add to the
flexibility and enable to serve uses across borders if needed.

However, ifsuchwouldbe the chosen path,exceptionsshould then be
veryaccurate on purpose,detailed and framed in order to achieve
the goal of better harmonisation of exceptionsandnotenlarge
their scope.Any new exceptions mustbe, of course, fully
compliant with the Berne Convention’s Three Step Test.A broad
definitionof the exceptionswould only add legal uncertainty
which would seriously challenge publishers’ ability to conduct
business.

NO OPINION

Should any newlimitations andexceptions be added toor removed
fromthe existing catalogue?Please explain by referring to
specific cases.

[Open question]

We do not see the need to add new exceptions to the existing
catalogue. Any new exception should answer a market failure and
the inability to serve users with licencing solutions. The
exercise of“Licences for Europe”,inwhich FEP and its membership
actively participated,shows that licencesare well suited
tocateringtouserdemandLicenses are the most flexible instrument
available in order to meet each user’s individual needs in the
relevant use case.New exceptions set prematurely in afast
movingworld where technologiesevolve very rapidly would
certainly stifle business innovation and the ability of
publishers todevelop offersto serve new needs.

Independently from the questions above, is there a need to
provide for a greater degree of flexibility in the EU
regulatory framework for limitations and exceptions?

YES – Please explain why

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO– Please explain why

The current 20optional exceptions with broad scope and wording
are meant to offer the necessaryflexibility, balanced with
legal certainty. We do not believe that broader wording
ofexceptions would serve the purpose of better
harmonisation.Yet more flexibility would lead to legal
uncertainty for bothrightholdersand users.Publishers invest in
content and increasingly licence it for digital
transmissions.As responsible economicactors of Europe’s
cultural influence,they need tobe able torely on a firmset of
rulestoprovidetheEUwitheconomic weapons on this strategic field
of world influence.We believeitis currentlyin place inthe 2001
Copyright Directive.

Interpretation by the national courts and the ECJ already plays
a central role in today’s interpretation of the exceptions.
However, introducing more flexibility and especially ageneral
rulesuchasFairUseinto the EC legal systemwould onlybringhuge
legal uncertainty, therebychallengingtheability of publishers
to conduct business.It would probably be the most efficient way
to destroy valueofthe EUcultural business market, hence
reinforcing non-EU economic actors’ influence. Is this the
wished-for futurefor theEUcultural economy?

FairUsein the U.S. provides a statutorydefence mechanismto what
could actually be infringement of exclusive copyright. This
effectively means thatrightholdersare forced to challenge uses
in courtafter the event. The test is based on a
centuryofU.S.-jurisprudence andthis jurisprudence would not be
readily available to the legal framework in Europe - indeed it
wouldimpose an unreasonably heavy burden of interpretation on
EU courts as they struggle to reconciletwo such dramatically
different regimes.Interestingly, the US Copyright Office states
on their website that the safestoption for prospective users of
content is to get clearance and that if there is any doubt,it
isadvisable to consult a lawyer.Ultimately, the Fair Use
principle entailspayinglawyers’fees.In addition, users will
lose legal certainty as the wholesystem will be far more
dependent on the circumstances of each case. Cases such as the
Google BookSettlement illustrate how big commercial players can
exploit the legal uncertainty around the USdoctrine to
economically exhaust rights holders, who are often not big
players, and who thereforecannot afford expensive litigation.

There seems to be a contradiction in calling for more
harmonisation and mandatory exceptions and at the same time
calling for more flexibility. We believe that there is
currently flexibility in the EU copyright system thanks to the
space of manoeuvre left between EU and national legislation
when transposing the EU copyright framework. This being said,
any legislation, however technology neutral, runs the risk to
be too closely tailored to business models and technologies of
its day rather than allowing for future developments. In
contrast,licences are by far the quickest, most flexibleandmost
effectivewayofachievingtechnology neutral and targeted
solutions.

NO OPINION

If yes, what would be the best approach to provide for
flexibility? (e.g.interpretation by national courts and the
ECJ, periodic revisions of the directives, interpretations by
the Commission, built-in flexibility, e.g. in the form of a
fair-useor fair dealingprovision / open norm, etc.)?Please
explain indicating what would be the relative advantages and
disadvantages of such an approach as well as its possible
effects on the functioning of the Internal Market.

[Open question]

.……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Does the territoriality of limitations and exceptions, in your
experience,constitute a problem?

YES–Please explain why andspecify which exceptions you are
referring to

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO–Please explainwhy andspecify which exceptions you are
referring to

Publishers are alsofrequently in the position of relying
onexceptions,e.g.for quotations.Theydo not
encounterproblemswhenrelying uponthe exception in the country
where they publish the bookand then sellingthe book across
Europe.Anyway, when possible, publishers favour licences which
are flexible and balanced. Licences foresee uses across borders
and can,unlike legislation, rapidlyadapt to changing
environments.The main issueswith territorialityareaddressed in
the following questionsof this consultation. Again, licenses
are the mechanism best suited to addressing them.

NO OPINION

In the event that limitationsand exceptionsestablished at
national level were to have cross-border effect, howshouldthe
question of “fair compensation” be addressed, whensuch
compensation is part of the exception? (e.g. who pays whom,
where?)

[Open question]

This is the core of the problemfrom our point of view.In the
current economic setting andwithbudget cutsoccurring in all EU
Member States,especiallyin the areas ofculture and education,
wedo notbelieve thatpublic authoritieswould be willing to
compensate exceptions with cross-border effectsif that meant
spending taxpayers’ money on benefitting tax-payers in another
Member State.

Access to content in libraries and archives

Directive2001/29/EC enablesMember Statesto reflect in their
national law a rangeoflimitations andexceptions for the benefit
of publicly accessible libraries, educational establishments and
museums, as well as archives. If implemented, these
exceptionsallow acts of preservation and archiving43

Article 5(2)c of Directive 2001/29.

andenable on-site consultation oftheworks and other subject
matter in the collections of such institutions44

Article 5(3)nof Directive 2001/29.

. The public lending(under an exception or limitation)by these
establishments of physical copies of works and other subject
matter is governed by the Rental and Lending Directive45

Article 5 of Directive 2006/115/EC.

.

Questionsarise as to whetherthe current framework continues to
achieve the objectives envisaged or whether it needs to be
clarified or updated to cover use in digital networks. At the
same time, questions arise as to the effect of such a possible
expansion on the normal exploitation of works and other subject
matter and as to the prejudice this may cause torightholders.
The role of licensing and possible framework agreements between
different stakeholders also needsto be considered here.

Preservationand archiving

The preservation of the copies of worksor othersubject-matter
held in the collections of cultural establishments (e.g. books,
records, or films)– the restoration or replacement of works, the
copying of fragile works -mayinvolvethe creation ofanother
copy/iesof these worksor othersubject matter. Most Member
States provide for an exception in their national laws allowing
for the making of such preservation copies.The scope of the
exceptiondiffersfrom Member State to Member State(as regardsthe
type of beneficiary establishments, the types of
works/subject-mattercovered by the exception, the mode of
copyingand the number of reproductions that a beneficiary
establishment may make).Also, the current legal status of new
types of preservation activities (e.g. harvesting and archiving
publicly available web content) is often uncertain.

(a)[In particular if you arean institutional user:]Have you
experienced specific problems when trying to use an exception
to preserve and archive specific works or other subject matter
in your collection?

(b)[In particular if you arearightholder:]Have you experienced
problems with the use by libraries, educational establishments,
museum or archives of the preservation exception?

YES – Please explain, by Member State, sector, and the type
of use in question.

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO

Wearenotaware ofany problemsin this area.

NO OPINION

If there are problems, how would they best be solved?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

If your view is that a legislative solution is needed, what
would be its main elements? Which activities of the beneficiary
institutions should be covered and under which conditions?

[Open question]

If your view is thatadifferent solutionisneeded, what would it
be?

[Open question]

Off-premises access to library collections

Directive 2001/29/EC provides an exception forthe consultation
ofworks and other subject-matter(consulting an e-book, watching
a documentary) viadedicated terminals on the premises of such
establishmentsfor the purpose of research and private study.
The online consultation ofworks and other subject-matter
remotely(i.e. when the library user is not on the premises of
the library)requires authorisation andis generallyaddressed in
agreements between universities/libraries and publishers.Some
argue that the law rather than agreements should provide for
the possibility to, and the conditions for,grantingonline
access to collections.

(a)[In particular if you are an institutional user:]Have you
experienced specific problems when trying to negotiate
agreements with rights holders that enable you to provide
remote access, including across borders,to your collections (or
parts thereof) for purposes of research and private study?

(b)[Inparticular if you are an enduser/consumer:]Have you
experienced specific problems when trying to consult, including
across borders,works and other subject-matter held in the
collections of institutions such as universities and national
libraries when you are not on the premises of the institutions
in question?

(c)[In particular if you are arightholder:]Have you negotiated
agreements with institutional users that enable those
institutions to provide remote access, including across
borders,to the works or other subject-matter in their
collections, for purposes of research and private study?

[Open question]

In Denmark there areagreementsbetween libraries and publishers
allowing for remote access to e-books.

If there are problems, how would they best be solved?

[Open question]

Any perceived “problems” can be solved by market-based
solutions.

If your view is that a legislative solution is needed, what
would be its main elements? Which activities of the beneficiary
institutions should be covered and under which conditions?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

If your view is thatadifferent solutionisneeded, what would it
be?

[Open question]

We believe that licensing should be encouraged.Any library
exception allowing making available online wouldonlycreate
unfair competition with business models,andbe contrary to the 3
step test.

E –lending

Traditionally, public libraries haveloanedphysical copies of
works (i.e. books, sometimes also CDs and DVDs) to their users.
Recent technological developments have made it technically
possible for libraries to provide users with temporary access
to digital content, such as e-books, music or films via
networks. Under the current legal framework, libraries need to
obtain the authorisation of the rights holders to
organisesuche-lending activities. In various Member States,
publishers and libraries are currently experimenting with
different business models for the making available of works
online, including direct supply of e-books to libraries by
publishers or bundling byaggregators.

(a)[In particular if you are alibrary:]Have you experienced
specific problems when trying tonegotiate agreements to enable
the electronic lending(e-lending), including across borders, of
books or other materials held in your collection?

(b)[In particular if you are an enduser/consumer:]Haveyou
experienced specific problems when trying to borrow booksor
other materialselectronically (e-lending), including across
borders,from institutionssuch as public libraries?

(c)[In particular if you are aright holder:]Have you negotiated
agreements with libraries to enable them to lend books or other
materials electronically, including across borders?

YES– Please explainwith specific examples

Publishers believe that librarieshave animportant
missioningiving access to books to the wider public in the
digital world.We have experienced that it is possible to reach
agreements between publishers and libraries bearing in mind
that such models should balance the apparent need to develop a
sustainable e-book market.Any exceptionin this
areawouldjeopardizethis balanceand would put a stop to the
development ofregular e-books sales through online retailers as
well as newinnovative services.

Almost all publishedDanishtrade e-books are available for the
patrons through one ofthe two Danish e-booklendingsolutions and
we are aware that many other initiatives are finding place
throughout Europe.Examples of those can be found in Annex II to
the hearing answer of The European Publishers Association.

NO

NO OPINION

If there are problems, how wouldtheybest be solved?

[Open question]

Any perceived problems can be solved by encouraging licensing
andsharingbest practices, butnot by creating legislation which
would prejudice commercial exploitation of booksand inhibit the
launch of new service and technical and business innovation.

The following two questions are relevant bothtothis point (n° 3)
and the previous one (n° 2).

[In particular if you are an institutional user:]What
differences do you see in the management of physical and online
collections, including providing access to your subscribers?
What problems have you encountered?

[Open question]

[In particular if you are a right holder:]What difference do you
see between libraries’traditional activities such as on-premises
consultation or public lending and activities such as
off-premises (online, at a distance) consultation and
e-lending? What problems have you encountered?

[Open question]

As statedabove, libraries remain essential institutions for
readers and are a relevantpartof the bookworld including with
the digital evolutions.Weacknowledgetheirrequest to shift
theirtraditional activities of on-premises and public
lendingtowardsonline developments.However, we should be
cautious that any move forward by librarieswill not jeopardise
a nascent e-book market. If all or a majorityof library
services weretobe offeredonline, there would be no more reason
to maintain local libraries,asa singlecentralservicewould be
sufficient, and if e-books were available on library services
with no friction there would be no basis for a commercial
e-book market.

Publishers are increasingly developing innovative and accessible
licences to allowa high level of granularity in giving users the
appropriate licences for their individual needs. There arestrong
economicarguments in favour ofmaintaining some form of
limitation to electronic “lending”in the online
environmentwhich make the library patron’s experience
comparable to borrowing a physical book.When the friction-less
library service eReolen was launched in November 2011 we saw
thate-lendingroseexponentiallywhereas there was hardly any
development on the commercial e-book market.Moreover, most of
the pirated books to be found online came from eReolen, which
as a consequencehas now shiftedto a streaming system. The
digital market isin its earliest stages, andno one can predict
its developmentat this stage. We need thereforeneed to test
different models and see how the market responds. Legislation
at this stage cannot be based on sufficient evidence and risk
to freezespecificbusiness models.

[-- Image: Pladsholder til indhold 1 --]

Development of Sales and Loans(number of copies)from Publizon
2011-2012 (Blue line: sales. Red line: loans through eReolen).

Mass digitisation

The term “mass digitisation” is normally used to refer to
efforts by institutions such as libraries and archives to
digitise (e.g. scan) the entire content or part of their
collections with an objective to preserve these collections
and, normally, to make them available to the public. Examples
are efforts by libraries to digitise novels form the early part
of the 20thcentury or whole collections of pictures of
historical value. This matter has been partly addressed at the
EU level by the 2011 Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) on key
principles on the digitisationand making available of out
of commerce works (i.e. works which are no longer found in the
normal channels of commerce),which isaimingto facilitatemass
digitisation efforts (for books and learned journals) on the
basis of licence agreements between libraries and similar
cultural institutions on the one hand and the collecting
societies representing authors and publishers on the other46

You will find more information about his MoU on the following
website:http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/copyright/out-of-commerce/index_en.htm.

.Provided the required funding is ensured(digitisation projects
are extremely expensive),the result of this MoU should bethat
books that are currently to be found only in the archives of,
for instance, libraries will be digitised and made available
online to everyone.The MoU is based on voluntary licences
(granted by Collective Management Organisations on the basis of
the mandates they receive from authors and publishers). Some
Member States may need to enact legislation to ensure the
largest possible effect ofsuchlicences (e.g. by establishing in
legislation a presumption of representation of a collecting
society or the recognition of an “extended effect” to the
licences granted)47

France and Germany have already adopted legislation to back the
effects of the MoU.The French act (LOI n° 2012-287 du 1er mars
2012 relative à l'exploitation numérique des livres
indisponibles du xxe siècle) foresees collectivemanagement,
unless the author or publisher in question opposes such
management.The German act (Gesetz zur Nutzung verwaister und
vergriffener Werke und einer weiteren Änderung des
Urheberrechtsgesetzes vom 1.Oktober 2013) contains a legal
presumption of representation by a collectingsociety in
relation to works whose rightholdersare not members of the
collecting society.

.

[In particular if you are an institutional user,engaging or
wanting to engage in mass digitisation projects,a rightholder,a
collective management organisation:]Would itbe necessaryin your
country to enact legislationto ensure thattheresults of the
2011 MoU (i.e. the agreements concluded between libraries and
collecting societies) havea cross-border effect sothatout of
commerce workscan be accessedacross the EU?

YES– Please explainwhy and how it could best be achieved

NO– Please explain

With the 2008 amendment to the Danish Copyright Act introducing
the general ECL provision (sec. 50(2)), users such as libraries
and collecting societies were enabled to enter into mass
digitization projects. The provision was introduced as a means
to help facilitate digitizing the Danish cultural heritages and
mass digitization projects which include orphan works. Since
2008 Copydan Writing has entered into a number of licenses
regarding mass digitization and making available.

The licenses that are based on the ECL system cover the use of
works in Denmark. Such ECL licenses are limited to national
use, because the extended collective licensing (ECL) only
applies within the Danish territory. To be able to give such
licenses cross-border effect, itwould require that licenses
based on ECL or other forms of collective rights management
issued in one member state to be recognized in other member
states. In the 2011 MoU it is written in preamble 11 that they
are “calling on the European Commission, to the extent required
to ensure legal certainty in a cross-border context, to consider
the type of legislation to be enacted …”.

In Denmark the legislation is in place, but whether or not
national legislation is required can only be answered when the
EC introduces a solution in relation to the 2011 MoU.

In relation to mass digitization of non-commercial works, then
in our view the main issue is not about clearing rights but
about rising public funding.

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO OPINION

Would it be necessary to develop mechanisms, beyond those
already agreed for other types of content (e.g. for audio- or
audio-visual collections, broadcasters’ archives)?

 YES – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO OPINION

Teaching

Directive 2001/29/EC48

Article 5(3)aof Directive 2001/29.

enables Member States to implement in their national
legislationlimitations and exceptionsfor the purpose of
illustration fornon-commercialteaching. Such exceptions would
typically allow a teacher to use parts of or full works to
illustrate his course,e.g.by distributing copies of fragments
of a book or of newspaper articles in the classroom or by
showing protected content on a smart boardwithout having to
obtain authorisation from the right holders.The open
formulation of this (optional) provision allows for rather
different implementation at Member States level.The
implementation of the exception differs from Member State to
Member State, with several Member States providinginsteada
framework for the licensing of contentforcertain
educationaluses. Some argue that the lawshould provide for
better possibilities for distance learningand study at home.

(a)[In particular if youare an enduser/consumeror an
institutional user:]Have you experienced specific problems when
trying to use works orother subject-matter for illustration for
teaching, including across borders?

(b)[In particular if youare aright holder:]Have youexperienced
specificproblems resulting from the wayin which works or other
subject-matter are used for illustration for teaching,
including across borders?

YES–Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO

Most publishers are currently developing innovative offers in
the field of educational publishing, now including digital uses
of educational material for example for white boards.
Educational publications are nowadays coming together with
versatile and flexible mechanisms, which are also possibly
accessible cross-border. Educational publishers are also
increasingly licencing modules and parts of books, rather than
the entire book. It is in the interest for them to tailor their
offer on new needs of their users.

In Denmark, the system of ECL licensing agreements with schools,
universities etc. functions very well to the benefit for both
rightsholders and educational institutions. Licensing means
flexibility and avoidance of uncertainty regarding the
understanding of an exception limited to “illustration” for
educational purposes.

NO OPINION

If there are problems, how wouldtheybest be solved?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

What mechanisms exist in the market place to facilitate the use
of content for illustration for teaching purposes?How
successful are they?

[Open question]Book publishing has entered the digital age since
many years; first ICT was integrated in the production
processes, and more recently technological developments have
allowed reaching out to readers with digital products.
Educational publishers are no exception to this; it is in the
nature of their business to meet the needs of their users, and
thus they have been producing and making available digital
learning materials since a number of years.The ambitious
project by the Danish government and KL to digitize the primary
schools in Denmark has involved financial support to schools who
buy digital learning materials.Stimulating the demand
financially has led to publishers investing heavily innew
digital innovative learning materials.

Educational publishing represents an importantpart of thebook
publishing market which cannot afford to be put at risk by a
broad exception.A vibrant Europeaneducational
publishingindustryis a guarantee of freedom of expression and
plurality of viewsand economic independenceand prosperity for
the EU.

Publishers would like to remind the Commission of the central
role of high qualityeducational resourcesthat are produced
independently of political and commercial interests. Such
resources serve forknowledge dissemination, effective learning
processes and for the success of each student in application of
the equality principle. Educational outcomes should be the first
and foremost concern when considering initiatives affecting the
educational sector.

Where the distribution of learning materials on the market
doesnot 100 % meet the users need we apply extended collective
licensing (ECL) in Denmark. Because ECL based licenses include
all works of all artists of a defined type it can provide the
broadest possible access to use of content and a high level of
legal security for the users. At the same time it provides
rightsholders with fair remuneration for the exploitation of
their works and support that content creators are able and
encouraged to continue creating new works. The system is
accepted by both educational institutions and rightsholders and
has been for many years, which is the best testimony of its
success.

The use of the ECL is consequently very successful, and enables
Copydan Writing to clear the rights for a lot of different uses
in schools. The agreements are very successful, and the main
licenses cover almost 100 % of all schools in Denmark.

The ECL system is a way of managing rights in organized form and
is not to be seen as an exception.

As Copydan Writing licenses on the basis of the ECL system the
uncertainty in regards to the scope of “illustration for
teaching” is avoided. It is worth mentioning that there has not
been need for settling of disputes in a court of law. All
matters have been solved amongst the parties and if necessary
it is possible to bring questions on the fee of the license
before the Copyright License Tribunal. There haven’t been any
cases before the tribunal in recent years.

Funds are important for the possibility of producing and
distributing new creative content to the benefit of the
educational system.

The development of the licenses is ongoing and occurs through
continued discussions with the educational sector and the
rightsholder organizations.

All licenses allow the institutions to copyin print and
digitallyfor educational purposes and for internal
administrative use.

If your view is that a legislative solution is needed, what
would be its main elements? Which activities of the beneficiary
institutions should be covered and under what conditions?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

If your view is thatadifferent solutionisneeded, what would it
be?

[Open question]

Research

Directive 2001/29/EC49

Article 5(3)a of Directive 2001/29.

enables Member States to choose whether to implement in their
national laws a limitation for the purpose of non-commercial
scientific research.Theopenformulation of this (optional)
provision allows forratherdifferent implementationsat Member
States level.

(a)[In particular if you arean enduser/consumeror an
institutional user:]Haveyou experienced specific problems when
trying to use works or other subject matter in thecontextof
research projects/activities, including across borders?

(b)[In particular if you area right holder:]Haveyouexperienced
specificproblems resulting from the wayin which works or other
subject-matter are usedin thecontextof research
projects/activities, including across borders?

YES–Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO

European publishersare satisfied with the current exception and
are not aware of specific issues. Content for research purposes
falls either under the exceptions or is licenced (90% of
scientific technical and medical publishing content is licenced
in digital form).

NO OPINION

If there are problems, how wouldtheybest be solved?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

What mechanisms exist in the Member States to facilitate the use
of content for research purposes?How successful are they?

[Open question]

In the case of scholarly journal publishing, publishers are
offering 90% of their products in digital form having
successfully covered the objective of providing access to the
content.Copydan Writing’s licenses with educational
institutions supplement the licenses that the institution can
enter into directly with publishers concerning periodicals and
other scientific and research publications.

Disabilities

Directive 2001/29/EC50

Article 5 (3)b of Directive 2001/29.

provides for an exception/limitation for the benefit of people
with a disability.The open formulation of this (optional)
provision allows for rather different implementations at Member
States level.At EU and international level projects have
beenlaunched to increase the accessibilityof works and other
subject-matterforpersons with disabilities (notably by
increasing the number of works published in special formats and
facilitating their distribution across the European Union)51

The European Trusted Intermediaries Network (ETIN)resulting
froma Memorandum of Understanding betweenrepresentatives of the
right-holder community (publishers, authors, collecting
societies) and interested parties such as associations for
blind and dyslexic
persons(http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/copyright/initiatives/access/index_en.htm)
and the Trusted Intermediary Global Accessible Resources (TIGAR)
project in WIPO (http://www.visionip.org/portal/en/).

.

The Marrakesh Treaty52

MarrakeshTreaty to Facilitate Access to Published Works by
Visually Impaired Persons and Persons with Print
Disabilities,Marrakesh, June 17 to 282013.

has been adopted to facilitate access to published works for
persons who are blind, visually impaired, or otherwise print
disabled. The Treaty creates a mandatory exception to copyright
that allows organisations for the blind to produce, distribute
and make available accessible format copies to visually
impaired persons without the authorisation of the rightholders.
The EU and its Member Stateshave startedwork to sign and ratify
the Treaty. This may require the adoption of certain provisions
at EU level (e.g. to ensure the possibility to exchange
accessible format copies across borders).

(a)[Inparticular if you are a person with a disability or an
organisation representing persons with disabilities:]Have you
experienced problems with accessibility to content, including
across borders,arising from Member States’ implementation of
this exception?

(b)[Inparticular if you are an organisationproviding services
for persons with disabilities:]Have you experienced problems
when distributing/communicating works published in special
formats across the EU?

(c)[In particular if you are a rightholder:]Have you experienced
specificproblems resulting fromthe application of limitations or
exceptions allowing for the distribution/communication of works
published in special formats, including across borders?

YES–Please explainby giving examples

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO

NO OPINION

Ifthere are problems, what could be done to improve
accessibility?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

What mechanisms exist in the market place to facilitate
accessibility to content? How successful are they?

[Open question]

Publishers are now increasingly publishing books in ePub format
whichincorporated the specification for accessibility of
theDaisyconsortium, so that publishers are enabled to produce
files that areaccessible to visually impaired
people.Moreover,VIPscan be helped by various functionalities in
the files, such as changing colour, font, spacing which reduce
the number of cases in which the conversion under an exception
are needed.

Dissemination of knowledge from national institutions working
with VIPs to the publishing sector is vital in order to ensure
that the needs of the VIPs can be integrated in the production.

Text and data mining

Text and data mining/content mining/data analytics53

For the purpose of the present document, the term “text and data
mining” will be used.

are different terms used to describe increasingly important
techniques used in particular by researchers for the
exploration of vast amounts of existing texts and data (e.g.,
journals, web sites, databases etc.). Through the use of
software or other automated processes, an analysis is made of
relevant texts and data in order to obtain new insights,
patterns and trends.

The texts and data used for mining are either freely accessible
on the internet or accessible through subscriptions to e.g.
journals and periodicals that give access to the databases of
publishers. A copy is made of the relevant texts and data (e.g.
on browser cache memories or in computers RAM memories or onto
the hard disk of a computer), prior to the actual analysis.
Normally, it is considered that to mine protected works or
other subject matter, it is necessary to obtain authorisation
from the right holders for the making of such copies unless
such authorisation can be implied (e.g. content accessible to
general public without restrictions on the internet, open
access).

Some argue that the copies required for text and data mining are
covered by the exception for temporary copies in Article 5.1 of
Directive 2001/29/EC. Others consider that text and data mining
activities should not even be seen as covered by copyright. None
of thisis clear, in particular since text and data mining does
not consist only of a single method, but can be undertaken in
several different ways. Important questions also remain as to
whether the main problems arising in relation to this issue go
beyond copyright (i.e. beyond the necessity or not to obtain
the authorisation to use content) and relate rather to the need
to obtain “access” to content (i.e. being able to use e.g.
commercial databases).

A specific Working Group was set up on this issue in the
framework of the "Licences for Europe" stakeholder dialogue. No
consensus was reached among participating stakeholders on either
the problems to be addressed or the results. At the same time,
practical solutions to facilitate text and data mining of
subscription-based scientific content were presented by
publishers as an outcome of “Licences for Europe”54

See the document “Licences for Europe – tenpledges to bring more
content
online”:http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/copyright/docs/licences-for-europe/131113_ten-pledges_en.pdf.

.In the context of these discussions, other stakeholders argued
that no additional licences should be required to mine material
to which access has been provided through a
subscriptionagreement and considered that a specific exception
for text and data mining should be introduced, possibly on the
basis of a distinction between commercial and non-commercial.

(a)[In particular if you are an enduser/consumeror an
institutional user:]Haveyou experiencedobstacles,linked to
copyright,when trying to usetext or data miningmethods,
including across borders?

(b)[In particular if you are aservice provider:]Have you
experienced obstacles, linked to copyright, when providing
services based on text or data mining methods, including across
borders?

(c)[In particular if you are a rightholder:]Have you experienced
specificproblems resulting fromthe use of text and data mining
in relation to copyright protected content, including across
borders?

YES–Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO–Please explain

For the time being, TDM requests are still rather limited
although they are expected to grow steadily in the coming
years. For non-commercial researchers wanting to mine the
articles and data contained in published journals and books for
which they have a subscription, STM publishers have committed to
provide licenses under standardterms at no additional cost. The
commitment has been made in the framework of L4E. Obviously the
circumstances are very different when one deals with commercial
players who will mine content and data for their own commercial
purposesand one should beware of piracy and parasitism
risks.Yet, publishers are very willing to allow them to mine
their publications provided that this is dealt with under
licensing terms.

NO OPINION

If there are problems, how wouldtheybest be solved?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

If your view is that a legislative solution is needed, what
would be its main elements? Which activities should be covered
and under what conditions?

[Open question]

………………………………………………………………………………………………….

If your view is thatadifferent solutionisneeded, what would it
be?

[Open question]

Encourage licensing and information about licensing as this has
been done under Licensing for Europe.

Are there other issues, unrelated to copyright, that constitute
barriers to the use of text or data mining methods?

[Open question]

User-generated content

Technological and service developments mean that citizens can
copy, use and distribute content at little to no financial
cost. As a consequence, new types of online activities are
developing rapidly, including the making of so-called
“user-generated content”. While users can create totally
original content, they can also take one or several
pre-existing works, change something in the work(s), and upload
the result on the Internet e.g. to platforms and blogs55

A typical example could be the “kitchen” or “wedding” video
(adding one's own video to a pre-existing sound recording), or
adding one's own text to a pre-existing photograph.Other
examples are “mash-ups” (blending two sound recordings), and
reproducing parts of journalistic work (report, review etc.) in
a blog.

. User-generated content (UGC) can thus coverthe modification of
pre-existing works even if the newly-generated/"uploaded" work
does not necessarily require a creative effort and results from
merely adding, subtracting or associating some pre-existing
content with other pre-existing content. This kind of activity
is not “new” as such. However, the development of social
networking and social media sites that enable users to share
content widely has vastly changed the scale of such activities
and increased the potential economic impact for those holding
rights in the pre-existing works. Re-use is no longer the
preserve of a technically and artistically adept elite. With
the possibilities offered by the new technologies, re-use is
open to all, at no cost. This in turn raises questions with
regard to fundamental rights such the freedom of expression and
the right to property.

A specific Working Group was set up on this issue in the
framework of the"Licences for Europe" stakeholder dialogue. No
consensuswas reachedamong participating stakeholders on either
the problems tobe addressed or the resultsor even the
definition of UGC. Nevertheless, awide range of viewswere
presentedas to the best way to respond to this phenomenon.
Oneviewwasto say that a new exception is needed to cover UGC,
in particular non-commercial activities by individuals such as
combining existing musical works with videos, sequences of
photos, etc. Anotherview wasthat no legislative change is
needed: UGC is flourishing, and licensing schemes are
increasingly available (licence schemes concluded between
rightholders and platforms as well as micro-licences concluded
between rightholders and the usersgenerating thecontent. In any
event, practical solutions to ease user-generated content and
facilitate micro-licensing for small users were pledged by
rightholders across different sectors as a result of the
“Licences for Europe” discussions56

See the document “Licences for Europe – tenpledges to bring more
content
online”:http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/copyright/docs/licences-for-europe/131113_ten-pledges_en.pdf.

.

(a)[In particular if you are an enduser/consumer:]Have you
experienced problems when trying to use pre-existing works or
other subject matter to disseminate new content on the
Internet, including across borders?

(b)[In particular if you are a service provider:]Have you
experienced problems when users publish/disseminatenew content
based on the pre-existing works or other subject-matter through
your service, including across borders?

(c)[In particular if you are a right holder:]Have you
experienced problems resulting from the way the users are using
pre-existing works or other subject-matter to disseminate new
content on the Internet, including across borders?

 YES – Please explain by giving examples

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO

There is no legal void for the use of a protected work in the
print sector (exception for short quotation or parody/
pastiche/ caricature, or licence with the right-holder or new
tools offered by the platforms or Creative commons regime).Note
that even “non-commercial” UGC often harms creators’ rights,
competes with legitimate sales, and is offered on sites with
advertising and/or profit motives.

NO OPINION

(a)[In particular if you are an end user/consumer or a right
holder:]Have you experienced problems when trying to ensure
that the work you have created (on the basis of pre-existing
works) is properly identified for online use? Are proprietary
systems sufficient in this context(b)[In particular if you are
a service provider:]Do you provide possibilities for users that
are publishing/disseminating the works they have created (on the
basis of pre-existing works) through your service to properly
identify these works for online use?

 YES – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO OPINION

(a)[In particular if you are an enduser/consumeror aright
holder):]Have you experienced problems when trying to be
remunerated for the use of the work you have created (on the
basis of pre-existing works)?

(b)[In particular if you are a service provider:]Do you provide
remuneration schemes for users publishing/disseminating the
works they have created (on the basis of pre-existing works)
through your service?

 YES – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO OPINION

If there are problems, how would they best be solved?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

If your view is that a legislative solution is needed, what
would be its main elements? Which activities should be covered
and under what conditions?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

If your view is thatadifferent solutionisneeded, what would it
be?

[Open question]

We believe that licensing is the best solution in this case,
which is also the only solution that respects moral rights.
Publishers are developing click-through seamless
micro-licensing system for cases that go beyond the quotation
exceptions. We believe that licence schemes could also be put
in place with blogs platform hosting textand images.On the
internet it is almost impossible to talk aboutNon-commercial”
transformative usesas the publication is usuallycommercial in
the sense that they generate advertising revenue for the
platforms on which they are published.

Private copying and reprography

Directive 2001/29/EC enables Member States to implement in their
national legislation exceptions or limitations to the
reproduction right for copies made for private useand
photocopying57

Article 5. 2)(a) and (b)of Directive 2001/29.

.Levies are charges imposed at national level on goods typically
used forsuch purposes(blank media, recording equipment,
photocopying machines, mobile listening devices such as mp3/mp4
players, computers, etc.) with a viewtocompensating rightholders
forthe harm they suffer whencopiesaremade
withouttheirauthorisation by certain categories of persons
(i.e. natural persons making copies for their private use)
orthrough use of certain technique (i.e. reprography).In that
context, levies are important for rightholders.

With the constant developments in digital technology, the
question arises as to whether the copying of files by
consumers/end-users who have purchased content online - e.g.
when a person has bought an MP3 fileandgoes on
tostoremultiplecopies of thatfile(in her computer, her tablet
and her mobile phone) -alsotriggers, or should trigger,the
application of private copying levies. It is argued that, in
some cases,these leviesmay indeedbe claimedby
rightholderswhetheror notthelicence feepaid by the service
provideralready covers copies made bythe enduser.
Thisapproachcould potentially lead to instances of double
payments whereby levies could be claimed on top ofservice
providers’licencefees58

Communication "Unleashing the Potential of Cloud Computing in
Europe", COM(2012) 529 final.

59

These issues were addressed in the recommendations of Mr António
Vitorino resulting from the mediation on private copying and
reprography levies.Youcan consult these recommendationson the
following
website:http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/copyright/docs/levy_reform/130131_levies-vitorino-recommendations_en.pdf.

.

There is also an on-going discussion as to the application or
not of levies to certain types of cloud-based services such as
personal lockers or personal video recorders.

In your view, is there a need to clarify at the EU level the
scope and application of theprivate copyingand
reprographyexceptions60

Art. 5.2(a) and 5.2(b) of Directive 2001/29/EC.

in the digital environment?

YES–Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO–Please explain

When a use is permitted by law and impactsarightsholderinour
sector, it requires remuneration,and levies are one of the ways
to remunerate. But no exceptionmayprejudice the normal
exploitation of a work, even when compensated by a levy.
Current levy systems, where in place, have their own merits and
are one of the ways to foresee the compensation for private
copying and reprography. In most cases, publishers are
perfectly satisfied with their collective management
organisationsand the levy system in place. However, some
countries chose not to have levy systems and this should be
respected.In Denmark we have very good experience with the
Extended Collective Licensing Model.Indeed, every country deals
with its situation within a national and cultural context which
cannot be exported to the rest of Europe on an arbitrary basis.
We therefore do not believe that there is currently a need to
harmonise further the functioning of the levy systems.In
particular, it must continue to be a requirement that certain
exceptions are only permissible if fair compensation is
provided to the rightholders. Rightholders eligible for a fair
compensation comprise both the authors and the publishers.

NO OPINION

Should digital copies made by end users for private purposes in
the context of a service that has been licensed by
rightholders, and where theharmto the rightholder is minimal,
be subject to private copying levies?61

This issue was also addressed in the recommendations of Mr
Antonio Vitorino resulting from the mediation on private
copying and reprography levies

 YES – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO – Please explain

.……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO OPINION

How would changes in levies with respect to the application
toonline services (e.g.services based oncloud computing
allowing, for instance, usersto have copieson different
devices)impactthe development and functioning ofnewbusiness
modelson the one hand and rightholders’ revenue on the other?

[Open question]

Would you see an added value in making levies visibleon the
invoices for products subject to levies?62

This issue was also addressed in the recommendations of Mr
Antonio Vitorino resulting from the mediation on private
copying and reprography levies.

 YES – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO OPINION

Divergingnational systems levy different products and apply
different tariffs. This results in obstacles tothefree
circulation of goods and servicesin the Single Market.At the
same time, many Member States continue to
allowtheindiscriminate application of private copying levies to
all transactions irrespective of the person to whom the product
subject to a levyis sold(e.g. private person or business). In
that context, not all Member States have ex ante exemption
and/or ex post reimbursement schemes which could remedy these
situations and reduce the number of undue payments63

This issue was also addressed in the recommendations of Mr
Antonio Vitorino resulting from the mediation on private
copying and reprography levies.

.

Have you experienced a situation whereacross-border transaction
resulted inundue levy payments, or duplicate payments of the
same levy, or other obstacles to the free movement of goods or
services?

YES–Pleasespecify the type of transaction and indicate
thepercentageoftheundue payments. Please also indicatehow a
priori exemption and/orex post reimbursement schemes could help
to remedy the situation.

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO–Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO OPINION

What percentage of products subject to a levy is sold to persons
other than natural persons for purposes clearly unrelated to
private copying? Do any of those transactionsresult in undue
payments? Please explain in detail the example you provide
(type of products, type of transaction, stakeholders, etc.).

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Where such undue payments arise, what percentage of trade do
they affect? To what extent could a priori exemptionsand/orex
post reimbursement schemes existing in some Member States help
to remedy the situation?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Ifyou have identified specificproblemswith the current
functioning of the levy system, howwould these
problemsbestbesolved?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Fairremuneration of authors and performers

TheEUcopyrightacquisrecognises for authors and performers a
number of exclusive rights and, in the case of performers whose
performances are fixed in phonograms, remuneration rights. There
are few provisions in the EU copyright law governing
thetransferof rights from authors or performers to producers64

See e.g. Directive 92/100/EEC, Art.2(4)-(7).

or determining who the owner of the rights is when the work or
other subject matter is created in the context of an employment
contract65

See e.g.Art. 2.3. of Directive 2009/24/EC,Art. 4 of Directive
96/9/EC.

. Thisis an area that has been traditionally left for Member
States to regulate and there are significant differences in
regulatory approaches.Substantial differences also exist
between different sectors of the creative industries.

Concerns continue to be raised that authors and performers are
not adequately remunerated, in particular but not solely, as
regards online exploitation. Many consider that the economic
benefit of new forms of exploitation is not being fairly shared
along the whole value chain. Another commonly raised issue
concerns contractual practices, negotiation mechanisms,
presumptions of transfer of rights, buy-out clauses and the
lack of possibility to terminate contracts. Some stakeholders
are of the opinion that rules at national level do not suffice
to improve their situation and that action at EU level is
necessary.

[In particular if you arean author/performer:] What is the best
mechanism (or combination of mechanisms) to ensure that you
receive an adequate remuneration for the exploitation of your
works and performances?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Is there a need to act at the EU level (for instance to prohibit
certain clauses in contracts)?

YES–Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO–Please explainwhy

Publishers arenaturallyvery much in favour of a fairremuneration
of their authors. Ensuring thisisa vital part oftheir core
mission.Publishing is a business with many players and strong
competition and an author who is unsatisfied with his publisher
will publish his next book at another publisher.Authors are
associated to the success of their work, theyusuallyreceive an
advance to complete their work and then a royalties
proportionate to the sale of their work.Contracts in publishing
are based on individual negotiations. Collective author
agreements are not practiced in the book publishing
sector.Moreover,collecting societies do not play the same
roleas in the other sectors.As mentioned above, our collecting
societies, the RROs only manage secondary rights andauthors and
publishers are both members of the same collecting societies.
Therefore solution based on an unwaivable equitable
remuneration right managed by a CMO would not apply to the
publishing sector. In Germany, where a right to “adequate
remuneration was introduced, we noticed as a consequence only
lawsuits from translators and a translation market that dropped
consequently, as publishers have such a tight margin that they
can often no longer afford to take the risk associated with
publishing translated works.If publishing companies were no
longer directly financially involved in the exploitation of
their books, they would have fewer incentives to invest in
promoting new authors and to innovate through new concepts, to
the detriment of cultural diversity.

NO OPINION

Ifyou consider that the current rules are not effective, what
would you suggest to addresstheshortcomingsyou identify?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Respectforrights

Directive 2004/48/EE66

Directive 2004/48/EC of the European Parliament and of the
Council of 29 April 2004 on the enforcement of intellectual
property rights.

provides for a harmonised framework for the civil enforcement of
intellectual property rights, including copyright and related
rights. The Commission has consulted broadly on this text67

You will find more information on the following
website:http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/iprenforcement/directive/index_en.htm

. Concerns have been raised as to whether some of itsprovisions
are still fit to ensure a proper respect for copyright in the
digital age. On the one hand, the current measures seem to be
insufficient to deal with the new challenges brought by the
dissemination of digital content on the internet; on the other
hand, there are concerns about the current balance between
enforcement of copyright and the protection of fundamental
rights, in particular the right for a private life and data
protection. While it cannot be contested that enforcement
measures should always be available in case of infringement of
copyright, measures could be proposed to strengthen respect for
copyright when the infringed content is used for a commercial
purpose68

For example when the infringing content is offered on a website
which gets advertising revenues that depend on the volume of
traffic.

. One means to do this could be to clarify the role of
intermediaries in the IP infrastructure69

This clarification should not affect the liability regime of
intermediary service providers established by Directive
2000/31/EC on electronic commerce, which will remain unchanged.

. At the same time,there could beclarification of the
safeguardsforrespect of private life and data protection for
private users.

Shouldthe civil enforcement system in the EU be rendered more
efficient for infringements of copyright committed with a
commercial purpose?

YES–Please explain

We believe thatthe current EU legal system framed by the 2006
Enforcement Directive is satisfactory, although some aspect can
be done, namelyto improve the civil enforcement systemacrossthe
EU. We refer on this to our answer to the Commission’s public
consultation on the “efficiency of proceedings and
accessibility of measures.”

The EnforcementDirective has broadly provided
aharmonizedframework of enforcement rules, but these still
diverge in practice, as some Member States failed to implement
some of the provisions correctly. Furthermore, the rapid
evolution of the internet has created new ways to infringe
copyright, which was not envisaged when the Enforcement
Directive was discussed and adopted. European publishers
welcome the recognition by the Commission that some aspects of
the Directive could therefore be improved to better reflect the
needs of the market in these changed circumstances.

The Enforcement Directive needs to extend the presumption of
ownership to holders of exclusive licenses or to assignees of
copyright owners, as the findings of the staff working paper
also point out. Publishers do not benefit from a “related
right”, in the same way producers of sound recordings or
films do as holders to the “related right”, which results in
publishers lacking “locus standi”. However, structurally, it is
rarely the author but mostly the publisher that will have the
resources to take legal action but most of the time they waste
time and resources in proving ownership.

We would like to first point out that the distinction between
commercial and non-commercial is an unclear one, as most of the
“non-commercial” exchange website benefit from advertisement
revenue and, although this is difficult to measure, file
exchange and download do represent a loss sale. However, the
position of European publishers is not to go after individuals
but rather after the source where the illegal websites are
originating.

NO–Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO OPINION

In particular,isthe current legal framework clear enough to
allow forsufficient involvement of intermediaries (such as
Internet service providers, advertising brokers, payment
service providers, domain name registrars, etc.) in inhibiting
online copyright infringements with a commercial purpose? If
not, whatmeasureswould be useful to foster the cooperation of
intermediaries?

[Open question]

European publishers do believe on this particular question
thatsome clarification would be welcomewhen it comes to the
involvement of intermediaries. We understand that there is no
political will to reopen the e-commerce directive and we
support this. However, we need to have a clear legal framework
on which intermediary is concerned as one under the E-commerce
Directive.European publishers share the opinion that search
engines which enable the indexation of file-sharing websites
host or facilitate the distribution of pirated content and
thereby should contribute to reducing online copyright
infringement through preventive measures such as preventing
suggested automatic searches to suggest illegal search and
through responding efficiently to ‘notice and take down’
notifications.We understand that the cooperation of ISPs will
be of primary importance in securing better respect for
intellectual property rights online. ISPs provide access to the
Internet and interconnect the underlying networks, host websites
and servers. We strongly agree that it would be useful to
“clarify [that] injunctions should not depend on the
liability of the intermediaries”, and that the notion of
liability of ISPs should be clarified when they can have
several functions (hosting or editing). ISPs have a
responsibility to assist in tackling copyright infringement
online, regardless of their accountability for the content
itself. There is limited capacity in the national courts (as
well as the limitation ofrightholders’ time and money) to bring
the number of actions against infringers necessary to curb
infringement. Besides, notice and take down procedures should
be simplified. Indeed the main problem arises from the
difficulty to gather all the elements necessary for the notice
and in particular to determine who the publisher of the website
is, so as to send him the notice as the same time as to the
ISP.FEP has always put forward solutions based on dialogue and
strongly regrets that ISPs have walkedaway from the dialogue on
illegal up-and-download in 2010 and facilitated by the European
Commission. European publishers would like to be able to
continue working in this voluntary way with ISPs, in order to
come to workable solutions to tackling online copyright
infringement.

Does the current civil enforcement framework ensure that the
right balance is achieved between the right to have one’s
copyright respected and other rights such as the
protectionofprivate life and protection of personal data?

YES–Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO–Please explain

Of course data privacy rules are capital to the respect of
European citizens' right to privacy, however, they should not
act as a shield to illegal activities. Instruments such as the
Enforcement Directive (2004/48/EC) are essential to provide
rightholders with the means to fight against piracy i.e.
article 8 on the right to obtain information about
infringements and infringers. The 2006 Data Retention Directive
(2006/24/EC) requires ISPs to store data and communicate it to
relevant authorities.

Despite the ECJ's clarification in the two rulings Promusicae in
2008 (C-275/06) and Tele 2 (C-557/07), there remains some
uncertainty about whether EU law presents an obstacle to the
applications of article 8 of the Enforcement directive. The
second ruling referred to the first and states that a Member
State can prescribe an obligation to disclose personal data to
private third parties to ensure that these can take legal
action in a civil case relating to breach of copyright. The
Swedish Supreme court asked for a preliminary ruling to know
whether provisions relating to discovery orders are compatible
with the Data protection Directive.

One non-legislative solution could be to adapt contractual
practices of ISPs to facilitate the transmission of data
torightholders. Currently, it is very challenging in most
countries for publishers to face time-consuming and expensive
court procedures every time their intellectual property rights
are infringed online.

NO OPINION

A single EU Copyright Title

The idea ofestablishing aunifiedEU CopyrightTitlehas been
presentin the copyright debate for quite some time now,
although views as to the merits and the feasibility of such an
objective are divided. A unified EU Copyright Title would
totally harmonise the area of copyright law in the EU and
replace national laws. There would then be a single EU title
instead of a bundle of national rights. Some see this as the
only manner in which a truly Single Market for content
protected by copyright can be ensured, while others believe
that the same objective can better be achieved by establishing
a higher level of harmonisation while allowing for a certain
degree of flexibility and specificity in Member States’ legal
systems.

Should the EU pursue the establishment of a single EU Copyright
Title, as a means of establishing a consistent framework for
rights and exceptions to copyright across the EU, as well as a
single framework for enforcement?

YES

NO

NO OPINION

Should this be the next step in the development of copyright in
the EU? Does the current level of difference among the Member
State legislation mean that this is a longer term project?

[Open question]

We do not believe that a single EU Copyright title will bring
any benefits to the development of content online, which is
progressing well in the publishing sector. Differences between
national copyright laws do not constitute an obstacle to the
creation of an online market for the publishing sector.As
mentioned previously, the publishing sector benefits from a
healthy pan-European licensing systemwhich is not stifled by
the level of difference among the Member States legislation.

On the one hand, it is highly unlikely that an EU Copyright law
that takes precedence overnational copyrights would be able to
take into account the diverse cultural and legal
traditionswithinthe Member States. It seems particularly
difficult in view of the fundamental differences between
thesystem of “droit d’auteur” in continental Europe and the
British-Irish Copyright model. But evenwithin the tradition of
“droit d’auteur” substantial differences exist. The question
of moral rights orthe different notions of “originality” that
give rise to copyright protection as well as the
well-establishedand much-litigated UK definition of 'Fair
Dealing' for copyright exceptions are just a fewexamples of
such differences. On the other hand, if such a Community title
is construed in parallel tonational titles, the risk is to add
an unnecessary layer of legal complexity and burden in Europe.
It isalso relevant to note that an EU Copyright title would
risk lowering copyright protection standards,which would
certainly discourage investment in the digital content market.

It is not the first time that the Commission has asked about the
pros and cons of an EU CopyrightCode.It hasconsidered the
possibility of using the new Article 118 of the Lisbon Treaty
as a legal basis for thisfuture legal instrument. However, it
is not clear whether the Treaty confers specific competencyto
the EU in this regard, especially for copyright, since its
Article 118 was drafted for industrialproperty purposes.
According to the UK House of Lords, “the new Article 118 of the
TFEU is arestatement of existing powers. Although the Treaty of
Lisbon would not confer additional IP powerson the EU, it marks
a statement of political intent and a commitment to achieving
the Communitypatent”.It has not been fully confirmed as
towhether Article 118 of the new Lisbon Treaty confers
competency to the EC for the creation of asingle “Community
copyright title”. Article 118 was foreseen for industrial
property and thereforethere is a risk of legal uncertainty
including a possible annulment before the European Court
ofJustice for lack of legal basis. Copyright is acquired
without registration. This is the core principle ofCopyright as
enshrined in the Berne Convention, and any parallels drawn
between patent titles whichneed to be registered and Copyright
is extremelyperilous.

The introduction of a European copyright code or an optional
unitary copyright title isthereforehighlyunlikely to produce
the intended practical results and might in fact take at least
a decade toachieve. European publishers would therefore prefer
to have the Commission work on theenforcement of existing
rules, the facilitation of pragmatic dialogues and the
promotion ofvoluntary solutions such as the Memorandum of
Understanding on Key Principles on theDigitisation and Making
Available of Out-of-Commerce Works signed by all
stakeholdersconcerned.

Other issues

The above questionnaire aims to provide a comprehensive
consultation on the most important matters relating to the
current EU legal framework for copyright. Should any important
matters have been omitted, we would appreciate if you could
bring them to our attention, so they can be properly addressed
in the future.

Are there any other important matters related to the EU legal
framework forcopyright?Pleaseexplainandindicatehow such matters
should be addressed.

[Open question]

