


Public Consultation

on the review of the EU copyright rules

Contents

I.  Introduction  2

A.  Context of the consultation  2

B.  How to submit replies to this questionnaire  3

C.  Confidentiality  3

II.  Rights and the functioning of the Single Market  7

A.  Why is it not possible to access many online content
services from anywhere in Europe?  7

B.  Is there a need for more clarity as regards the scope of
what needs to be authorised (or not) in digital transmissions?
10

1.  The act of “making available”  10

2.  Two rights involved in a single act of exploitation  11

3.  Linking and browsing  12

4.  Download to own digital content  13

C.  Registration of works and other subject matter – is it a
good idea?  14

D.  How to improve the use and interoperability of identifiers
15

E.  Term of protection – is it appropriate?  15

III.  Limitations and exceptions in the Single Market  16

A.  Access to content in libraries and archives  19

1.  Preservation and archiving  19

2.  Off-premises access to library collections  20

3.  E – lending  21

4.  Mass digitisation  22

B.  Teaching  23

C.  Research  25

D.  Disabilities  25

E.  Text and data mining  27

F.  User-generated content  28

IV.  Private copying and reprography  31

V.  Fair remuneration of authors and performers  33

VI.  Respect for rights  34

VII.  A single EU Copyright Title  36

VIII.  Other issues  36

Introduction

Context of the consultation

Over the last two decades, digital technology and the
Internethavereshaped the ways in which content is created,
distributed, and accessed.New opportunities have materialised
for those that create and produce content (e.g. a film, a
novel, a song),for new and existingdistribution platforms,for
institutions such as libraries, for activities such as research
and for citizens who now expect to be able to access content –
for information, education or entertainment purposes–regardless
of geographical borders.

This new environmentalso presentschallenges.One of themis for
the market tocontinue toadapt to new forms of distribution and
use.Another oneis for the legislator to ensure that the system
of rights, limitations to rights and enforcement
remainsappropriateand is adapted to the new environment.This
consultation focuses on the second of these challenges:
ensuring that the EU copyright regulatory frameworkstays fit
for purpose in the digital environmentto support creation and
innovation, tap the full potential of the Single
Market,fostergrowth andinvestment in our economy
andpromotecultural diversity.

In its"Communication on Content in the Digital Single Market"1

COM (2012)789 final, 18/12/2012.

the Commission set out two parallel tracks of action:ontheone
hand, to complete its on-going effort to review and to
modernise the EU copyright legislative framework2

As announced in the Intellectual Property Strategy ' A single
market for Intellectual Property Rights: COM (2011)287 final,
24/05/2011.

3

"Based on market studies and impact assessment and legal
drafting work"as announced in the Communication (2012)789.

with a view to a decision in 2014 on whether to table
legislative reform proposals, andon the other, to facilitate
practical industry-led solutions through the stakeholder
dialogue"Licences for Europe"on issues on which rapid progress
was deemed necessary and possible.

The"Licences for Europe"process has been finalised now4

See the document “Licences for Europe – tem pledges to bring
more content
online”:http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/copyright/docs/licences-for-europe/131113_ten-pledges_en.pdf.

. The Commission welcomes the practical solutions stakeholders
have put forward in thiscontext and will monitor their
progress. Pledges have been made by stakeholders in all four
Working Groups (cross borderportability ofservices,
user-generated content,audiovisual andfilm heritageand text and
data mining). Taken together, the Commission expects these
pledgesto bea further step in making the user environment
easier in many different situations. The Commission also takes
note of the fact that two groups –user-generated content
andtext and data mining–did not reach consensus among
participating stakeholders on either the problems to be
addressed or on the results. Thediscussions andresults
of"Licences for Europe"will be also taken into account in the
context of the review of the legislative framework.

As part of thereview process, the Commission is now launching a
public consultation onissuesidentified in the Communication on
Content in the Digital Single Market, i.e.:"territoriality in
the Internal Market, harmonisation, limitations and exceptions
to copyright in the digital age; fragmentation of the EU
copyright market; and how to improve the effectiveness and
efficiency of enforcement while underpinning its legitimacy in
the wider context of copyright reform".As highlighted in the
October 2013 European CouncilConclusions5

EUCO 169/13, 24/25 October 2013.

"Providingdigital services andcontentacross the single market
requires the establishment of a copyright regime for the
digital age. The Commission will therefore complete its
on-going review of the EU copyright framework in spring 2014.
It is important to modernise Europe's copyright regime and
facilitate licensing, while ensuring a high level protection of
intellectual property rights and taking into account
culturaldiversity".

This consultationbuildson previous consultationsand public
hearings, in particularthose onthe"Green Paper on copyright in
the knowledge economy"6

COM(2008)
466/3,http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/copyright/copyright-infso/index_en.htm#maincontentSec2.

,the"Green Paper on the online distribution of audiovisual
works"7

COM(2011) 427
final,http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/consultations/2011/audiovisual_en.htm.

and"Content Online"8

http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/consultations/2009/content_online_en.htm.

. These consultationsprovidedvaluablefeedback from
stakeholderson a number of questions,on issues as diverse as
theterritorialityofcopyrightand possible ways to overcome
territoriality,exceptionsrelated to the online dissemination of
knowledge,and rightholders’remuneration, particularly in the
audiovisual sector.Views were expressed by stakeholders
representing all stages in the value chain, including right
holders, distributors, consumers, and academics. The questions
elicited widely diverging views on the best way to proceed.
The"Green Paper on Copyright in the Knowledge Economy"was
followed up by a Communication. The replies to the"Green Paper
on the online distribution of audiovisual works"have fed into
subsequent discussions on the Collective Rights Management
Directive and into the current review process.

How tosubmitreplies tothis questionnaire

You are kindly asked to send your repliesby5February2014inaMS
Word, PDForOpenDocumentformattothefollowinge-mailaddressof DG
Internal Market and
Services:markt-copyright-consultation@ec.europa.eu.Please note
that replies sentafterthat datewill not be taken into account.

This consultation is addressedto different categories of
stakeholders. To the extent possible, the questions indicate
the category/iesof respondents mostlikelyto be concernedby
them(annotation in brackets, before the actual question).
Respondentsshould nevertheless feel freeto reply to any/all of
the questions. Also, please note that,apart from the question
concerning the identification of the respondent, none of the
questions is obligatory.Replies containing answers only to part
of the questions will be also accepted.

You are requested toprovideyour answers
directlywithinthisconsultation document. For the“Yes/No/No
opinion”questionsplease put the selected answer
inboldandunderlineit so it is easy for us to see your
selection.

In your answers to the questions, you are invited to refer to
the situation in EUMember States.You are also invitedin
particularto indicate, where relevant, what would be the
impactof options you put forwardin terms of costs,
opportunities and revenues.

The public consultation is available in English.
Responsesmay,however,be sent in any of the 24officiallanguages
of the EU.

Confidentiality

The contributionsreceivedin this round of consultation as well
as asummary reportpresenting theresponsesin a statistical and
aggregated formwill be published on the website of DG MARKT.

Please note thatallcontributionsreceivedwill be
publishedtogether with the identity of the contributor, unless
the contributor objects tothepublication oftheirpersonal data
on the grounds that such publication would harm his or her
legitimate interests. In this case,the contributionwillbe
published in anonymous form upon the contributor's explicit
request. Otherwise the contribution will not be published nor
willits content bereflected in the summary report.

Pleaseread ourPrivacy statement.

Please identify yourself:

Name:

TheChamber ofPress Publishers - POLANDso calledIWP

ul. Foksal 3/5, 00-366 Warszawa

www.iwp.pl

In the interests of transparency, organisations (including, for
example, NGOs, trade associations and commercial enterprises)
are invited to provide the public with relevant information
about themselves by registering in the Interest Representative
Register and subscribing to its Code of Conduct.

If you are a Registered organisation, please indicate your
Register ID number below. Your contribution will then be
considered as representing the views of your organisation.

…………………………………………………………………………………………………..

…………………………………………………………………………………………………..

If your organisation is not registered, you have the opportunity
toregister now.Responses from organisations not registered will
be published separately.

If you would like to submit your reply on an anonymous basis
pleaseindicate it belowby underlining thefollowinganswer:

Yes, I would like to submit my reply on an anonymous basis

Type of respondent(Pleaseunderlinethe appropriate):

End user/consumer(e.g.internet user,reader, subscriberto musicor
audiovisualservice,
researcher,student)ORRepresentativeofendusers/consumers

for the purposes of this questionnaire normally referred to
in questions as "end users/consumers"

Institutional user (e.g. school,university,
researchcentre,library, archive)ORRepresentativeof
institutional users

for the purposes of this questionnaire normally referred to
in questions as "institutional users"

Author/PerformerORRepresentativeof authors/performers

Publisher/Producer/BroadcasterORRepresentative of
publishers/producers/broadcasters

the two above categoriesare, for the purposes of this
questionnaire, normally referred to in questions as "right
holders"

Intermediary/Distributor/Other service provider(e.g.online music
or audiovisual service, games platform, social media, search
engine, ICT industry)ORRepresentative of
intermediaries/distributors/other service providers

for the purposes of this questionnaire normally referred to
in questions as "service providers"

Collective Management Organisation

Public authority

Member State

Other (Please explain):

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Rights and the functioning of the Single Market

Why is it not possible to accessmanyonline content servicesfrom
anywhere in Europe?[Theterritorialscope of the rights involved
in digital transmissions and the segmentation of the market
through licensing agreements]

Holders of copyright and related rights –e.g. writers, singers,
musicians-do not enjoya singleprotection in the EU. Instead,
they are protected on the basis of a bundle of national rights
in each Member State. Those rights have been largely harmonised
by the existingEUDirectives. However,differences remain andthe
geographical scopeof the rightsis limited to the territory of
the Member State granting them.Copyright is thus territorial in
the sense that rights are acquired and enforced on a
country-by-country basis under national law9

This principle has been confirmed by the Court of justice on
several occasions.

.

The dissemination of copyright-protected content on the Internet
–e.g. by a music streaming service,orbyanonline e-book
seller–thereforerequires, in principle,an authorisation for
each national territory in which the content is communicatedto
the public. Rightholdersare, of course,in a position togranta
multi-territorial or pan-Europeanlicence, such thatcontent
services can be provided in several Member States and across
borders.A number of stepshave beentaken at EU level to
facilitate multi-territoriallicences: the proposal for a
Directive on Collective Rights Management10

Proposalfor a Directiveof the European Parliament and of the
Councilof 11 July 2012 on collective management of copyright
and related rights and multi-territorial licensing of rights in
musical works for online uses in the internal market, COM(2012)
372 final.

should significantly facilitate the delivery of
multi-territorial licences in musical worksfor online
services11

CollectiveManagementOrganisations play a significant role inthe
management of online rights for musical works in contrastto
thesituation where online rights are licenseddirectly by right
holders such asfilm or record producers or by newspaper or book
publishers.

;thestructured stakeholder dialogue “Licences for Europe”12

You can find more information on the following website:
http://ec.europa.eu/licences-for-europe-dialogue/.

and market-led developments such as the on-going work in the
Linked Content Coalition13

You can find more information on the following
website:http://www.linkedcontentcoalition.org/.

.

"Licences for Europe" addressed in particular the specific issue
of cross-border portability, i.e. the ability of consumers
having subscribed to online services in their Member State to
keep accessing them when travelling temporarily to other Member
States. As a result, representatives of the audio-visual sector
issued a joint statement affirming their commitment to continue
working towards the further development of cross-border
portability14

See the document “Licences for Europe – tem pledges to bring
more content
online”:http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/copyright/docs/licences-for-europe/131113_ten-pledges_en.pdf.

.

Despite progress, there are continued problems
withthecross-borderprovisionof, and access to, services. These
problems are most obviousto consumerswanting to access
servicesthatare madeavailable in Member Statesother than the
one in which they live.Not all online services are available in
all Member States and consumers face problems when trying
to access such services across borders. In some instances,
even if the“same”service is available in all Member States,
consumerscannotaccess theservice across borders (they can
onlyaccess their“national” service, and if they try to
accessthe "same" servicein another Member State they are
redirected to theonedesignatedfortheir country of residence).

Thissituationmayin part stem from the territoriality of
rightsand difficulties associated with the clearing of rights
in different territories.Contractual clauses in licensing
agreements between rightholders and distributors and/or between
distributors and end users mayalsobe at the origin of some of
the problems (denial of access, redirection).

The main issueat stake hereis,therefore,whether furthermeasures
(legislative or non-legislative, including market-led
solutions)need tobe taken at EU level in the medium term15

For possible long term measures such as the establishment of
aEuropean Copyright Code(establishinga single title) see
section VII of this consultation document.

to increase the cross-border availability of content services in
the Single Market,while ensuring an adequate level of
protectionfor right holders.

[In particular if you arean enduser/consumer:]Have you faced
problems whentryingto access online services in an EU Member
State other than the one in which you live?

YES - Please provide examples indicating the Member State,
the sector and the type of content concerned (e.g. premium
content such as certain films and TV series, audio-visual
content in general, music, e-books, magazines, journals and
newspapers, games, applications and other software)

NO

NO OPINION

[In particular if you area service provider:]Have you faced
problems when seeking to provide online services across
bordersin the EU?

YES - Please explain whether such problems, in your
experience, are related to copyright or to other issues (e.g.
business decisions relating to the cost of providing services
across borders, compliance with other laws such as consumer
protection)? Please provide examples indicating the Member
State, the sector and the type of content concerned (e.g.
premium content such as certain films and TV series,
audio-visual content in general, music, e-books, magazines,
journals and newspapers, games, applications and other
software).

NO

 NO OPINION

[In particular if you area right holder or acollective
management organisation:]Howoftenare youaskedtogrant
multi-territorial licences?Pleaseindicate, if possible, the
number of requests per yearand provide examples indicating the
Member State, the sector and the type of content concerned.

[Open question]

Regarding B2B services, there are single requests for granting
multi-territorial licences for entire newspaper or magazine –
for such services as Press Agencies (e.g. Reuters). There is
also a few requests per year for granting multi-territorial
licences for reprint of single article – number of such
requests is depended on the position of newspaper or magazine.
Such requests concern only a few of the most opinion- forming
press titles.Due to specific nature of the press – most of the
licenses are granted to individual consumers in the national
market.Licensing mechanisms concerning e-subscriptions do not
contain any territorial limitations – thus, consumers can have
free access to the subscriptions they order or digital press
from all over the world. Therefore, the need for
multi-territorial licences is (in this respect) not relevant at
all. On the other hand, free consumer licences concerning
posting hyperlinks to articles in social media have no
territorial limitations and they cover the particular service’s
users, who are among the receivers of a given publication; it is
the language and relations between users rather than territory
that plays a decisive role. As far as business licenses related
to reproduction and press clippings are concerned, the majority
of them are national licenses since press is topically
connected with a national territory. Reproduction licenses
relate to concrete internet services of other press titles.
Territory is specified exclusively in licenses for publications
in the printed press. In case of licenses for digital editions
and press clippings, there are no territorial limitations; the
scope of a license is generally defined by a number of end
customers authorised to receive the service.

Using foreign press is marginal since the press primarily covers
regional topics and the additional barrier is language; the
press is generally distributed in national languages. The
solution for this marginal but important activity was the
establishment by the European publishers (including Polish
publishers) of the Press Database Licensing Network (PDLN), the
administrator of the net which can be joined by companies
authorised to distribute press content in particular European
countries.

If you have identified problems in the answers to any of the
questions above – what would be the bestway to tacklethem?

[Open question]

It is important to underline that right holders in the press
sector should always be able to decide what the subject or
subjects of the license will be. The all-European license
should always be a consequence of a choice but it should never
be imposed. Moreover, the Commission has to take into account
the fact that press is primarily a national product and the
cultural issues are regulated on national level where the
principle of subsidiarity should apply. From publishers’ point
of view, there are far more serious barriers and obstacles in
multi-territorial licensing than the territorial character of
copyright. A great number of articles appearing in the press
every day require publishers’ cooperation across Europe. This
cooperation is difficult and hinders quick development of press
services online. The major obstacles are: unclear antitrust
laws, differences between tax systems (e.g. different VAT
rates) and dominance in the markets of several European
countries, including Poland, of pirate services in the area of
press clippings which results in unfair competence with legal
service providers. Therefore, IWP is of the opinion that the EC
should first of all secure publishers’ copyright protection
against infringements and prevent unfair practices, in
particular, the abuse of dominant position by service providers
gaining profits from press circulation.

[In particular if you area right holder or acollective
management organisation:]Are there reasons why, evenin cases
where you holdall thenecessaryrights forall theterritoriesin
question,youwould still find it necessaryor justifiedto impose
territorial restrictions onaservice provider (in order, for
instance, to ensure that access to certain content is not
possible in certainEuropeancountries)?

YES – Please explain by giving examples

NO

NO OPINION

[In particular if you aree.g. a broadcasterora service
provider:]Are there reasons why,evenin cases where you have
acquiredall thenecessaryrights for all the territoriesin
question,youwould still find it necessaryor justifiedto impose
territorial restrictions on the service recipient (in order for
instance, to redirect the consumer to a different website than
the one he is trying to access)?

 YES – Please explain by giving examples

 NO

 NO OPINION

Do you think that further measures (legislative or
non-legislative, including market-led solutions) are needed at
EU level to increase the cross-border availability of content
services in the Single Market, while ensuring an adequate level
ofprotection for right holders?

YES – Please explain

NO

As far as multi-territorial licenses are concerned, it is
important to take into account a predominantly national
character of the press sector. Due to a very strong impact on
local languages and culture the rights management is best
performed at national level. It is vital - while launching EU
initiatives in this field - to avoid “one for all” type of
solution since it does not take into account full cultural
diversity, great differentiation of products and sectors
(music, news media, books and audiovisual media), as well as
difficulties in formulating common rules in that area.

The current legislative framework does not hinder cross border
licensing in the news media sector. The Commission has
previously confirmed this in its document of 22 October 2009
entitled “Creative Content in a European Digital Single Market:
Challenges for the Future”: “The present legal framework does
not in itself prevent right holders from commercialising their
works on a multi-territory basis” (Article 2 page 12).
Commercial users can generally request authorisation for using
the work directly from a publisher or an author or obtain such
authorisation on the basis of a worldwide contract.

NO OPINION

Is there a need for more clarityas regardsthe scope ofwhat needs
to be authorised (or not) in digital transmissions?[The
definition of the rightsinvolved in digital transmissions]

The EU framework for the protection of copyright and related
rights in the digital environment is largely established by
Directive 2001/29/EC16

Directive 2001/29/EC of the European Parliament and of the
Council of 22 May 2001 on the harmonisation of certain aspects
of copyright and related rights in the information society.

on the harmonisation of certain aspects of copyright and related
rights in the information society. OtherEUdirectives in
thisfieldthatare relevant in the online environment are those
relating to the protection of software17

Directive 2009/24/EC of the European Parliament and of the
Council of 23 April 2009 on the legal protection of computer
programs.

and databases18

Directive 96/9/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council
of 11 March 1996 on the legal protection of databases.

.

Directive 2001/29/ECharmonisestherights of authors and
neighbouring rightholders19

Film and record producers, performers and broadcasters are
holders of so-called “neighbouring rights” in, respectively,
their films, records, performances and broadcast. Authors’
content protected by copyright is referred to as a “work” or
“works”, while content protected by neighbouring rights is
referred to as “other subject matter”.

which are essential for thetransmission of digital copiesof
works(e.g. an e-book)and other protected subject matter(e.g. a
record in a MP3 format)over the internetor similar digital
networks.

The mostrelevantrightsfor digital transmissionsarethe
reproduction right, i.e. the right to authorise or prohibit the
making of copies20

The right to “authorise or prohibit direct or indirect,
temporary or permanent reproduction by any means and in any
form, in whole or in part” (see Art. 2 of Directive 2001/29/EC)
although temporary acts of reproduction of a transient or
incidental nature are, under certain conditions, excluded (see
art. 5(1) of Directive 2001/29/EC).

,(notablyrelevant at the start of the transmission –e.g. the
uploading ofadigital copy of a work to a serverin view ofmaking
it available–and at the users’ end– e.g. when a user downloads
a digital copy of a work)and the communication to the
public/making available right, i.e. the rights to authorise or
prohibit the dissemination of the works in digital networks21

The right to authorise or prohibit any communication to the
public by wire or wireless means and to authorise or prohibit
the making available to the public “on demand” (seeArt. 3 of
Directive 2001/29/EC).

.These rightsare intrinsically linked in digital
transmissionsandboth need to be cleared.

Theact of“making available”

Directive 2001/29/EC specifiesneitherwhatis covered bythe making
available right(e.g. the upload,the accessibility by the
public,theactualreception by the public)norwherethe act of
“making available” takes place. This does not raise
questionsif the act is limited to a single territory.
Questionsarise however when the transmission covers several
territories and rights need to be cleared (does the act of
"making available" happeninthe country of the upload only?in
each of the countries where the content is potentially
accessible?in each of the countries where thecontent
iseffectivelyaccessed?).The most recent case law of the Court
of Justice of the European Union (CJEU)suggests that a relevant
criterion is the“targeting” of a certainMember State'spublic22

See in particularCase C-173/11(Football Dataco vs Sportradar)
andCase C-5/11 (Donner) for copyright and related rights, and
Case C-324/09 (L’Oréal vs eBay) for trademarks. With regard to
jurisdiction seealso joined Cases C-585/08 and C-144/09 (Pammer
and Hotel Alpenhof)andpending CaseC-441/13 (Pez Hejduk);
seehowever,adopting a different approach, CaseC-170/12
(Pinckney vs KDG Mediatech).

. According to this approachthecopyright-relevantact(whichhas
tobe licensed)occursat leastin those countries which are
“targeted” by the online service provider.A service provider
“targets” a group of customers residing in a specific country
when it directsits activity to that group, e.g. via
advertisement, promotions, a language or a currency
specifically targeted at that group.

Isthe scope of the“making available”right in cross-border
situations – i.e. when content is disseminated across borders
–sufficiently clear?

YES

NO–Pleaseexplain how this could be clarified and what
typeofclarification would be required(e.g.as in "targeting"
approach explained above,as in "country of origin"approach23

The objective of implementing a “country of origin”approachis to
localise the copyright relevant act that must be licenced in a
single Member State (the "country of origin", which could be
for example the Member State in whichthe content is uploaded or
wherethe service provider is established), regardless of in how
many Member States the work canbe accessed or received. Such an
approachhas already been introduced at EU level with regard to
broadcasting by satellite(seeDirective 93/83/EEC on the
coordination of certain rules concerning copyright and rights
related to copyright applicable to satellite broadcasting and
cable retransmission).

)

NO OPINION

[In particular if you are a right holder:]Coulda clarification
of the territorial scope of the“making available”right have
aneffect on therecognition of yourrights (e.g.whetheryou are
considered to be an author or not,whetheryou are considered to
have transferred your rights or not),onyourremuneration,
oronthe enforcement of rights(including the availability of
injunctive relief24

Injunctive relief is a temporary or permanent remedy allowing
the right holder to stop or prevent an infringement of his/her
right.

)?

YESand NO – Please note our comments to the question 10

NO OPINION

Two rights involved in a single act of exploitation

Each act oftransmission in digital networks entails(in the
current state of technology and law) several reproductions.This
means that there are two rights that apply to digital
transmissions: the reproduction right and the making available
right. Thismay complicate the licensing of works for online
usenotably whenthetwo rights are held bydifferent
persons/entities.

[In particular if youa service provider or a right holder:]Does
the application of two rights toa single act of economic
exploitation in the online environment (e.g. a download)create
problemsfor you?

YES – Please explainwhat type of measureswould be needed in
order to address such problems (e.g. facilitation of joint
licences when the rights are in different hands,legislation to
achieve the "bundling of rights")

 NO

Due to specific way of content distribution on the Internet, the
“making available” right without the reproduction right means
the possibility to use “deep links” to content already placed
on Internet while both fields make it possible to distribute
the work on the website of a license purchaser. Due to the
above, the costs of both different licenses are different.

In case, authorisation is needed even for one field, the issue
whether right to one field or two fields is obtained is
important only as far as the granted license and its price are
concerned. The necessity to clearly differentiate between two
fields of exploitation is also required by the exception
mentioned in Directive 2001/29/EC (Art. 5(3)(c)) where
reproduction right is reserved for the press while making
content available (enabling providing links to the content) is
of a significantly broader nature.

In this situation, it is difficult to challenge justification of
such a solution and the need to make changes in this matter.

NO OPINION

Linking and browsing

Hyperlinks are references to data that lead a user from one
location in the Internet to another. They are indispensable for
the functioning of the Internet as a network. Severalcasesare
pending before the CJEU25

Cases C-466/12 (Svensson), C-348/13 (Bestwater International)
and C-279/13 (C More entertainment).

in which the question has been raised whether the provision of
a clickable link constitutes an act of communication to the
public/making available to the public subject to the
authorisation of the rightholder.

A user browsing the internet (e.g. viewing a web-page) regularly
creates temporary copies of works and other subject-matter
protected under copyright on the screen and in the 'cache'
memory of his computer. A question has been referred to the
CJEU26

Case C-360/13 (Public Relations Consultants Association Ltd).See
alsohttp://www.supremecourt.gov.uk/decided-cases/docs/UKSC_2011_0202_PressSummary.pdf.

as towhether such copies are always covered by the mandatory
exception for temporary acts of reproduction provided for in
Article 5(1) of Directive 2001/29/EC.

Should the provision of a hyperlink leading to a work or other
subject matter protected under copyright,either in generalor
under specific circumstances,besubject to the authorisation of
the rightholder?

YES

Poland applies the exception mentioned in Directive 2001/29/EC
(Art. 5(3)(c) which allows providing links to content of press
articles already placed on Internet unless such use is not
expressly reserved by publisher. It allows publishers to assess
whether search engines, aggregators or firms making editorial
content available to users are not engaged in unfair
competition against them depriving them of readers. In such
cases, a greater risk appears that readers would have no
motivation to continue clicking in order to visit newspaper’s
website when they obtained relevant information in the form of
article snippets provided with the link. From journalistic
point of view, first lines of a news article are very important
since they a so composed as to draw the reader’s attention and
to grasp the essence of the story which is then developed in
successive paragraphs.

When links to newspaper content are provided together with the
above mentioned information, there is a great risk of the
readers losing motivation to continue reading relevant
information on the newspaper websites as such. Such a
redirecting of traffic has also a negative impact on
advertising revenues which rely on the number of clicks
recorded on the newspaper website. Therefore, publishers;
content should not be used without their prior consentbeyond
what is truly indispensable for navigation in horizontal
search.

Using newspaper content without prior consent of the publisher
was a subject of concrete proceedings in the caseCopiepresse v
Googlein Belgium on allegations of infringement of intellectual
property rights. In that case, the court underlined that using
newspaper content [in Google News] should be considered the
copyright infringement. It has also to be underlined that the
principle of obtaining consent enables publishers to develop
business models of which consumers are beneficiaries. The
example of this is placingnavigation tools on newspaper
websites which allow to link with social media. Such solutions
provide consumers with legal certainty as to their activities
and with a certainty of circulation. Here is the example from a
website of an opinion-making daily:

[-- Image: Obraz 3 --]Untitled4

NO – Please explainwhether you consider this to be the case
in general,or under specific circumstances,and why(e.g. because
it does not amount to an act of communication to the public – or
to a new public, or because it should be covered by a copyright
exception)

NO OPINION

Should the viewing of a web-pagewhere this impliesthetemporary
reproduction of a work or other subject matterprotected under
copyrighton the screen andin thecache memoryof the user’s
computer,either in general or under specific circumstances,be
subject to the authorisation of the rightholder?

 YES–Pre-judiciary inquiry was forwarded to CJEU concerning
temporary copies of works created in the computer cache memory
by search engine while displaying websites (Case C-360/13
Public Relations Consultants Association). The Court will
decide whether such copies are within the scope of the
exemption specified in Directive 2001/29/EC (Art. 5(1). The
Court of Justice of the European Union defined its position in
a similar case in its decision of 17 January 2012 (Case C
302/10 Infopaq v. Danske Dagblades Forening). According to (the
Infosoc) Directive 2001/29/EC (Art. 5(1), acts of reproduction
shall be exempted from the reproduction right provided for in
Article 2 only when they fulfil five requirements, namely, when
the activity is of a transient or incidental nature, is an
integral and essential part of a technological process, its
sole purpose is to enable a transmission in a network between
third parties by an intermediary or a lawful use of a work or
other subject matter to be made, and which have no independent
economic significance. These conditions are of a cumulative
nature, i.e., failure to fulfil one of them means that the
given reproduction activity is not exempted on the basis of
Directive 2001/29/EC (Art. 5(1) provided for in Article 2 of
the Directive.

Therefore, the case requires analysis on the basis of the above
mentioned requirements. From the point of view of the press,
the role of search engines is far more important than that of
browsers, however IWP is of the opinion that a browser should
be considered a kind of a reprographic device and should be
subject to fee adequate to that provided for in national law
for other reprographic devices or licences in the countries
where there are no reprographic fees imposed on devices or pure
carriers connected with them – managed via appropriate copyright
management organisations.

NO – Please explainwhether you consider this to be the case
in general,or under specific circumstances,andwhy(e.g. because
it isor should be covered by a copyright exception)

NO OPINION

Download to own digital content

Digital content is increasinglybeing
boughtviadigitaltransmission(e.g. download to own). Questions
arise as to the possibility forusersto dispose of the filesthey
buy inthismanner(e.g. by selling themorby giving them as a
gift).Theprinciple of EU exhaustion of the distribution right
applies in the case of the distribution ofphysical copies (e.g.
when a tangible article such as a CD or a book, etc. is sold,
the right holder cannot preventthefurther distributionof that
tangible article)27

See also recital 28 of Directive 2001/29/EC.

. Theissuethat ariseshere is whether this principlecan also be
applied in the caseof an act of transmission equivalent in its
effect to distribution (i.e. where the buyer acquires the
property of the copy)28

In Case C-128/11 (Oracle vs. UsedSoft) the CJEU ruled that an
author cannot oppose the resale of a second-hand licence that
allows downloading his computer program from his website and
using it for an unlimited period of time. The exclusive right
of distribution of a copy of a computer program covered by such
a licence is exhausted on its first sale.While it is thus
admitted that the distribution right may be subject to
exhaustion in case of computer programs offered for download
with the right holder’s consent, the Court was careful to
emphasise that it reached this decision based on the Computer
Programs Directive. It was stressed that this exhaustion rule
constituted alex specialisin relation to the Information
Society Directive (UsedSoft, par. 51, 56).

.This raises difficultquestions, notably relating to the
practical application of such an approach (how to
avoidre-sellers keepingand usinga copy ofawork afterthey have
“re-sold” it– this is often referred to as the “forward and
delete” question) as well astotheeconomicimplications of the
creation of a second-hand market of copies of perfect quality
that never deteriorate(in contrast to the second-hand market
for physical goods).

[In particular if you arean enduser/consumer:]Haveyou
facedrestrictionswhen trying to reselldigital files that
youhavepurchased(e.g.mp3 file,e-book)?

YES–Please explainby giving examples

NO

NO OPINION

[In particular if you area right holderor a service provider:]
What would betheconsequencesofproviding a legal framework
enabling the resale ofpreviouslypurchaseddigital content?
Please specify per market(type of content)concerned.

[Open question]

The essence of the right exhaustion is a physical transfer of
ownership or ownership of the work’s copy. In simple terms, it
means that the seller has no work and thepurchaser/beneficiary
has it. When it is easy to make copies of digital works and
mailing a file with a work means its automated copying –
without the introduction of effective digital rights management
preventing copying – the institution of the right exhaustion
would in fact legalise piracy. This situation cannot be
compared to computer software where the condition of its using
is registration of the software copy. Thus, the owner can
control its use i.e. check whether the copy was removed from
the primary purchaser’s computer before being installed in the
computer of the next user. In case of the press, even when
applying the digital rights management, the common circulation
is possible only of one copy of a newspaper among many
beneficiaries of the eventual right exhaustion. In the
situation when the primary purchaser can transfer the read
digital copy to a successive user within one second by one
click of a mouse, and that user can transfer it to yet another
user, one copy can be made available to several dozen people
daily. Hence, IWP, considering the present status of technology
and the lack of protection - which is not only ineffective but
additionally means extra costs for publishers and is unfriendly
to customers (in, for instance, the ability to make private
copy) – strongly opposes the adoption of the principle of the
right exhaustion in relation to digital copies.

Registration of works andother subject matter – is it a good
idea?

Registration is not often discussed in copyrightin the EUas the
existing internationaltreaties in the area prohibit formalities
as a condition for theprotection and exerciseofrights.
However,this prohibition is not absolute29

For example, it does not affect “domestic” works – i.e.works
originating inthe country imposing the formalitiesas opposed to
works originating inanothercountry.

.Moreover a system of registration does not need to bemade
compulsory or constitute a precondition for the protection and
exercise of rights.Witha longer term ofprotectionand with the
increased opportunities that digital technology
providesfortheuse of content(includingolder works and works
thatotherwisewouldnot havebeen disseminated),the advantages and
disadvantages of a system of registrationare increasingly
beingconsidered30

On the basis of Article 3.6 of the Directive 2012/28/EU of the
European Parliament and of the Council of 25 October 2012 on
certain permitted uses of orphan works, a publicly accessible
online database is currently being set up by the Office
forHarmonisation of theInternalMarket (OHIM)for the
registration of orphan works.

.

Wouldthecreation ofa registration system at EU levelhelp in the
identification and licensing of works and other subject matter?

YES

NO

In new media publishers’ opinion, registration system at EU
level would create an unnecessary administration burden and
would cause general weakening of copyright protection because
of the indispensable assumption that only registered works are
to be protected by copyright.

According to current international legislation concerning
copyright, the registration cannot be mandatory and cannot be a
condition for the protection and exercise of rights.

Press publishers placing press articles on websites inform on
the conditions of their licensing. Under the majority of
articles, there is a link “Buy the license” or “License for
publication” leading to terms and conditions and price
catalogues. Therefore, running the register of articles would
not provide added values facilitating licensing but would only
signify higher costs for publishers.

[-- Image: Obraz 2 --]

[-- Image: Obraz 1 --]

NO OPINION

What would bethe possible advantagesof such a system?

[Open question]

None

What would bethe possible disadvantagesof such a system?

[Open question]

Due to society’s information needs and because of a huge number
of articles being continuously published every day, just after
events which they relate, their earlier registration is not
possible. Moreover, the arguments mentioned in the answer to
Question 15 apply.

Whatincentives forregistrationbyrightholderscouldbe envisaged?

[Open question]

How to improve theuse andinteroperability ofidentifiers

There are many private databases ofworks and other subject
matterheld by producers, collective management organisations,
and institutions such aslibraries, which are based to a greater
or lesser extent on the use of(more or less)interoperable,
internationally agreed ‘identifiers’. Identifierscan be
compared to a reference number embedded in a work,are specific
to the sector in which they have been developed31

E.g. the International Standard Recording Code (ISRC) is used to
identify recordings, the International Standard Book Number
(ISBN) is used to identify books.

, and identify, variously, the work itself, the owner or the
contributor to a work or other subject matter.There are notable
examples of where industry is undertaking actions to improve the
interoperability of such identifiers and databases. The Global
Repertoire Database32

You will find more information about this initiative on the
following website:http://www.globalrepertoiredatabase.com/.

should, once operational,provide a single source of information
on the ownership and control of musical works worldwide. The
Linked Content Coalition33

You will find more information about this initiative(funded in
part by the European Commission)on the following website:
www.linkedcontentcoalition.org.

was established to develop building blocks for the expression
and management of rights and licensing across all content and
media types. It includes the development ofa Rights Reference
Model (RRM) – a comprehensive data model for all types of
rights in all types of content. The UK Copyright Hub34

You will find more information about this initiative on the
following website:http://www.copyrighthub.co.uk/.

is seeking to take such identification systems a step further,
and to create a linked platform, enabling automated licensing
across different sectors.

Whatshouldbethe role of theEUin promoting the adoption
of identifiers in the content sector, and in promoting the
development and interoperability of rights ownership and
permissions databases?

[Open question]

At present, further development of technology facilitating
license solutions in the press sector via a click is being
initiated. In 2011, inter-medial and multinational coalition of
over 40 partners – including press publishers – from media and
creative industries was established. It included authors and
artists to make them cooperate with their standard authorities
to create automated and semi-automated communication between
right holders and those who want to use content, on the basis
of identifiers and inter-operative standards of metadata.

IWP is a member of ENPA which is a partner of that organisation
called Linked Content Coalition (LCC).

At present, there is the European Commission-supported RDI
project being launched which aims at further development of the
above mentioned programme. Each web user creating new content,
irrespective whether including re-use of already existing
content or not, should beable to simply add such identifiers to
his/her content, enabling better protection of creators and
improving their potential abilities to capitalise the content
they create.

Newspaper and news media publishers support further dialogue
with the European Commission in order to inform it and update
provided information concerning studies on possible
pan-European dimension of national initiatives such as the
British Copyright Hub. The European Commission should, wherever
possible, support the projects aimed at further improvement of
the Internet-based solutions in the area of providing
authorised access to content and using text and image works.

Term of protection– is it appropriate?

Works and other subject matter are protected under copyright for
a limited period of time. After the term of protection has
expired, a work falls into the public domain and can be freely
used by anyone (in accordance with the applicable national
rules on moral rights). The Berne Convention35

Berne Convention for the Protection of Literary and Artistic
Works,http://www.wipo.int/treaties/en/ip/berne/.

requiresa minimum term of protection of 50 years after the death
of the author. The EUrulesextend this term of protection to 70
years after the death of the author (as do many other
countries, e.g. the US).

With regard to performers in the music sector and phonogram
producers, theterm provided for in theEU rulesalsoextend20
years beyond what is mandated in international
agreements,providingfor a term of protection of 70 years after
the first publication. Performers and producers in the
audio-visual sector, however, do not benefit from such an
extended term of protection.

Arethe current terms ofcopyright protection still appropriate in
the digital environment?

YES–

In the IWP opinion, shortening the terms of copyright protection
could have negative consequences for development of culture.
Copyright are often treated by purchasers as investments, thus,
helping to stimulate and develop creativity and therefore
shortening the terms of copyright protection would lead to
decrease of their value and in result, remuneration for the
transfer of copyright would also be lowered. In further
perspective, it could cause the pauperisation of culture due to
the lack of authors’ motivation to create new works. Newspaper
and news media publishers regard present terms of copyright
protection as appropriate also for the digital environment.
Publishers should benefit from the protection of their
intellectual property in recognition of historical and cultural
importance of news media reporting current and past events and
the vital role the newspapers play in a democratic society.

Maintenance of the proper terms of copyright protection is
particularly important for newspaper publishers, given the
commercial value of heir archives, which increasingly
constitute a part of subscription and other paid-for business
models.

Newspaper publishers digitalise and make available their content
not only through their print and digital issues but also – on
the commercial basis – through their archives and databases.
Having much in common with other publishing sectors, newspaper
publishers differ, however, when it comes to their own business
models and our archives have a significant commercial value. New
markets are being constantly developed both inrelation to
historical and contemporary collections. Moreover, shortening
terms of copyright protection could undermine constitutional
rules of the acquired rights protection.

NO– Please explain if they should be longer or shorter

NO OPINION

Limitations and exceptions in the Single Market

Limitations and exceptions to copyright and related rights
enable the use of works and other protected
subject-matter,without obtaining authorisation from the
rightholders,for certain purposes and to a certain extent (for
instance the use for illustrationpurposesof an extract from a
novelby a teacher in a literature class). At EU level theyare
established in a number of copyright directives, most notably
Directive2001/29/EC36

Plus Directive 96/9/ECon the legal protection of
databases;Directive 2009/24/ECon the legal protection of
computer programs,and Directive 92/100/ECon rental right and
lending right.

.

Exceptions and limitations in the national and EU copyright laws
have to respect international law37

Article 9(2) of the Berne Convention for the Protection of
Literary and Artistic Works (1971); Article 13 of the TRIPS
Agreement (Trade Related Intellectual Property Rights) 1994;
Article 16(2) of the WIPO Performers and Phonograms Treaty
(1996); Article 9(2) of the WIPO Copyright Treaty (1996).

.In accordance with international obligations, the EU acquis
requires that limitations and exceptionscanonlybeapplied in
certain special cases which do not conflict with a normal
exploitation of the work or other subject matter and do not
unreasonably prejudice the legitimate interest of the
rightholders.

Whereas thecatalogueof limitations and exceptions included
inEUlawis exhaustive(no other exceptions can be applied to the
rights harmonised at EU level)38

Other than the grandfathering of the exceptions of minor
importance for analogue uses existing in Member States at the
time of adoption ofDirective 2001/29/EC(see, Art. 5(3)(o)).

, these limitations and exceptions areoftenoptional39

With the exception ofcertain limitations: (i)in the Computer
Programs Directive,(ii) in the Database Directive,(iii) Article
5(1) in theDirective 2001/29/ECand(iv) the OrphanWorksDirective.

,in the sense thatMember Statesare free to reflect in national
legislation as many or as few of them as they wish.Moreover,the
formulation of certain of the limitations andexceptionsis
general enough to give significantflexibility totheMember
States as to how,and to what extent,toimplement them (if they
decide to do so). Finally,it is worth noting that not all of
the limitationsand exceptionsincluded in the EUlegal framework
for copyrightare of equivalent significance in policy terms and
in terms of their potential effect on the functioning of the
Single Market.

Inaddition, inthe same manner that the definition of the rights
is territorial (i.e. has an effect only within the territory of
the Member State), the definition of the limitations and
exceptions to the rights is territorial too (so an act that is
covered by an exception in a Member State "A" may still require
the authorisation of the rightholder once we move to the Member
State "B")40

Only theexception established in therecent Orphan Works
Directive(a mandatory exceptionto copyright and related rights
in the case where the rightholders are not known or cannot be
located) has been givena cross-border effect, which means that,
for instance, once a literary work – for instance a novel – is
considered an orphan work in a Member State, that same
novelshall be considered an orphan work in all Member Statesand
can beused and accessed in all Member States.

.

The cross-bordereffectoflimitations andexceptionsalsoraises the
question of fair compensation of rightholders.In some
instances,Member States are obliged to compensate rightholders
for theharminflicted on them bya limitation orexceptionto their
rights. In otherinstancesMember Statesare not obliged, butmay
decide,to provide for such compensation.If a limitation or
exception triggering a mechanism of fair compensation were to
be given cross-border effect (e.g. the books are used for
illustration in an online course given by an university in
a Member State "A" and the students are in a Member State"B")
then there would also be a need to clarifywhich national law
shoulddeterminethe level of that compensation and who should
pay it.

Finally, the question of flexibility and adaptabilityis being
raised:what is the best mechanism to ensure that the EU and
Member States’ regulatory frameworks adapt when necessary
(either to clarify that certain uses are covered by an
exception or to confirm that for certain uses the authorisation
of rightholders is required)?The main question here is whether
a greaterdegree of flexibility can be introduced in the EU and
Member States regulatory framework while ensuringthe
requiredlegal certainty,including for the functioning of the
Single Market, and respecting the EU's international
obligations.

Are there problems arising from the fact that most limitations
and exceptions provided in the EUcopyrightdirectivesare
optionalfor the Member States?

YES – Please explain by referring to specific cases

NO –

Current optional nature of exemptions and limitations enables
Member States to use their national competence in the area of
creative and medial content, which are generally of a local,
regional and national character.

There is no evidence indicating that greater number of mandatory
limitations and exemptions would bring better results than the
pragmatic approach taken by the EU on the basis of optional
exemptions and limitations, in combination with development,
where possible and appropriate, of practical solutions in
individual cases aimed at expanding the scope of harmonisation.

Such pragmatic, voluntary approach allows Europe to lead in
development of innovative solutions and stands behind the fact
that European “IPR-intensive industries account for more than
56 million jobs or 26% of total employment in the EU”
(http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/intellectual-property/docs/joint-report-epo-ohim-final-version_en.pdf,
page 59).

In Poland, where almost all exceptions foreseen in the Directive
were adopted, the value of creative industries and innovation
are far lower than in the countries where these exceptions were
adopted in a minimal scale. In our opinion, all discussions
concerning harmonisation of exceptions should be preceded by a
thorough analysis of their impact on Member States’ internal
markets. The optional character of these exceptions enables
these Member States to verify their national legislations if
the impact assessment shows that the adopted exceptions hinder
development of creative industries and national creativity

NO OPINION

Should some/all of the exceptions be made mandatory and, if so,
is there aneed for a higher level of harmonisation of such
exceptions?

YES–Please explain byreferringto specific cases

NO –Similar to Question 21, we believe thatall discussions
concerning harmonisation of exceptions should be preceded by a
thorough analysis of their impact on Member States’ internal
markets

NO OPINION

Should any newlimitations andexceptions be added toor removed
fromthe existing catalogue?Please explain by referring to
specific cases.

[Open question]

NO.

Issues of expansion, limiting, clarification or making the
existing exceptions more flexible cannot be decided without a
thorough analysis of the impact on creating and financing
culture, and the economic aspect in terms of creating national
and European GDPs. We should answer the question who is a
beneficiary of such exceptions in the economic sense. Users or
platforms online, earning huge money on the users’ activities,
which – on the basis of an exception – place on these platforms
also copyright protected materials of the third parties. How do
the interests of creative enterprises who invest significant
resources into creativity look from this perspective? In a
longer perspective, it can lead to a disappearance and strict
rationing of professional creation due to the emergence of
state-financed creation and press materials of public media
financed from subscription fee as well as the creation
performed by people having other means of living.

Independently from the questions above, is there a need to
provide for agreaterdegree of flexibility in the EU regulatory
framework for limitations and exceptions?

YES – Please explain why

NO

Newspaper publisherswould like to stress that the optional
character of exceptions and limitations in the EU Directive on
copyright, already provides for a sufficient degree of
flexibility. No reform of the EU copyright framework should
necessarily include the introduction into European copyright
law of an American-style general fair use provision.

The American concept of “fair use” was introduced in the
analogue era. It is not appropriate to introduce this concept
into the EU legislation, which already allows for a
comprehensive list of exceptions to copyright. Publishers of
newspaper and news media are strongly opposed to the
introduction of a “fair use” provision into EU copyright
framework. Moreover, the actual scope and meaning of the
equivalent provision in the US is still being decided by case
law.

NO OPINION

If yes, what would be the best approach to provide for
flexibility? (e.g.interpretation by national courts and the
ECJ, periodic revisions of the directives, interpretations by
the Commission, built-in flexibility, e.g. in the form of a
fair-useor fair dealingprovision / open norm, etc.)?Please
explain indicating what would be the relative advantages and
disadvantages of such an approachas well asitspossible effects
on the functioning of the Internal Market.

[Open question]

Does the territoriality of limitations and exceptions, in your
experience,constitute a problem?

YES–Please explain why andspecify which exceptions you are
referring to

NO–

In general, in respect of licensing of newspaper content, the
territoriality of limitations and exceptions does not
constitute particular problems. User request related to rights
are to a large extent confined to uses and users within the
territory of one Member State. Demands for cross-border or
multi-territory licensing are limited and can be satisfactorily
addressed on the basis of the current models of operation.

NO OPINION

In the event that limitationsand exceptionsestablished at
national level were to have cross-border effect, howshouldthe
question of “fair compensation” be addressed, whensuch
compensation is part of the exception? (e.g. who pays whom,
where?)

[Open question]

Access to content in libraries and archives

Directive2001/29/EC enablesMember Statesto reflect in their
national law a rangeoflimitations andexceptions for the benefit
of publicly accessible libraries, educational establishments and
museums, as well as archives. If implemented, these
exceptionsallow acts of preservation and archiving41

Article 5(2)c of Directive 2001/29.

andenable on-site consultation oftheworks and other subject
matter in the collections of such institutions42

Article 5(3)nof Directive 2001/29.

. The public lending(under an exception or limitation)by these
establishments of physical copies of works and other subject
matter is governed by the Rental and Lending Directive43

Article 5 of Directive 2006/115/EC.

.

Questionsarise as to whetherthe current framework continues to
achieve the objectives envisaged or whether it needs to be
clarified or updated to cover use in digital networks. At the
same time, questions arise as to the effect of such a possible
expansion on the normal exploitation of works and other subject
matter and as to the prejudice this may cause to rightholders.
The role of licensing and possible framework agreements between
different stakeholders also needsto be considered here.

Preservationand archiving

The preservation of the copies of worksor othersubject-matter
held in the collections of cultural establishments (e.g. books,
records, or films)– the restoration or replacement of works, the
copying of fragile works -mayinvolvethe creation ofanother
copy/iesof these worksor othersubject matter. Most Member
States provide for an exception in their national laws allowing
for the making of such preservation copies.The scope of the
exceptiondiffersfrom Member State to Member State(as regardsthe
type of beneficiary establishments, the types of
works/subject-mattercovered by the exception, the mode of
copyingand the numberof reproductions that a beneficiary
establishment may make).Also, the current legal status of new
types of preservation activities (e.g. harvesting and archiving
publicly available web content) is often uncertain.

(a)[In particular if you arean institutional user:]Haveyou
experienced specific problems when trying to use an exception
to preserve and archive specific works or other subject matter
in your collection?

(b)[In particular if you arearightholder:]Have you experienced
problems with the use by libraries, educational establishments,
museum or archives of the preservation exception?

YES –

Press publishers in Poland have a big problem with the abuse of
that exception. It is closely connected with an inaccurate
implementation of Directive 2001/29/EC in Poland. The archive
status is claimed by private media monitoring companies, which
not only copy the content of all publically available content
online but also scan and digitalise the content of all
newspapers and magazines published in Poland, and then make
them available while providing commercial press clipping
services, referring at the same time to the exception for
documentary and information institutions. The market of press
clipping services provided in this way amounts to 80%. Respect
for copyright and fair competition is an essential precondition
for publishers’ continued investment in the wide range of
quality content to inform European citizens. Creating archives
of old issues of newspapers is allowed exclusively by the
consent of publishers. Archiving newspapers should occur
entirely for the purpose of preservation of the European
cultural heritage.

Therefore, this exception should be applied in a minimal scale.
In regard to current issues of newspapers and magazines and the
archives of press material made available online, the change of
the current scope of that exception would mean the introduction
of a mechanism of unfair competition towards press publishers.
An easy way to see press content made available online by the
publishers in a commercial manner, without leaving one’s home
via the library website, would entirely ruin, already poorly
performing digital press market in Poland. The issue of a
possibility of introducing paid-for licenses should be
thoroughly analysed. The permanent access to press content via
a website is an entirely different matter than borrowing a copy
of the work from a library

NO

NO OPINION

If there are problems, how would theybestbe solved?

[Open question]

By introducing voluntary licences

If your view is that a legislative solution is needed, what
would be its main elements? Which activities of the beneficiary
institutions should be coveredand under which conditions?

[Open question]

The main element of such solution should be equitable
remuneration for right holders. But legislative solution in
press sector is not needed if the beneficiary institutions will
negotiate with Polish Collecting Society (Publishers Association
REPROPOL) for licence

If your view is thatadifferent solutionisneeded, what would it
be?

[Open question]

First of all EC should check, if the rules of Directive
2001/29/EC are respectedin all EU countries.

Off-premises access to library collections

Directive 2001/29/EC provides an exception
fortheconsultationofworks and other subject-matter(consulting
an e-book, watching a documentary) viadedicated terminals on
the premises of such establishmentsfor the purpose of research
and private study. The online consultation ofworks and other
subject-matter remotely(i.e. when the library user is not on
the premises of the library)requires authorisation andis
generallyaddressed in agreements between universities/libraries
and publishers.Some argue that the law rather than agreements
should provide for the possibility to, and the conditions
for,grantingonline access to collections.

(a)[In particular if you are an institutional user:]Have you
experienced specific problems when trying to negotiate
agreements with rights holders that enable you to provide
remote access, including across borders,to your collections (or
parts thereof) for purposes of research and private study?

(b)[Inparticular if you are an enduser/consumer:]Have you
experienced specific problems when trying to consult, including
across borders,works and other subject-matter held in the
collections of institutions such as universities and national
libraries when you are not on the premises of the institutions
in question?

(c)[In particular if you are arightholder:]Have you negotiated
agreements with institutional users that enable those
institutions to provide remote access, including across
borders,to the works or other subject-matter in their
collections, for purposes of research and private study?

[Open question]

NO.

Institutional users (libraries) in Poland are not interested in
any license and are striving for an exception they could
benefit from. Poland has not yet introduced remuneration for
right holders for public lending rights. Because of a huge
burden, which is for publishers of the press and books the
obligation to deliver 18 free copies to libraries, a
possibility of replacing traditional copy with a digital copy
was discussed. Unfortunately, since libraries came to the
conclusion that they can provide access to a quire i.e. 8 pages
of each publication online, without consent and any compensation
for right holders (publishers), the agreement has not been
reached.

If there are problems, how would theybestbe solved?

[Open question]

In newspaper publishers’ view, problems are best solved through
stakeholder dialogues. Organisations representing libraries,
archives, authors, publishers and collective management
organisations have a proven track record in developing
solutions for libraries and archives through stakeholder
dialogues. Examples are principles for rights clearance and
registries of orphan works, model licensing agreements, etc.

If your view is that a legislative solution is needed, what
would be its main elements? Which activities of the beneficiary
institutions should be coveredand under which conditions?

[Open question]

By introducing voluntary licences.

If your view is thatadifferent solutionisneeded, what would it
be?

[Open question]

Problem to be solve – is creating non-commercial tools (like
search engines) which will make possible to distinguish
commercial or non-commercial use. The most profitable in
internet is not providing the copyright protected work but
delivering the tools to find or present it.

E –lending

Traditionally, public libraries haveloanedphysical copies of
works (i.e. books, sometimes also CDs and DVDs) to their users.
Recent technological developments have made it technically
possible for libraries to provide users with temporary access
to digital content, such as e-books, music or films via
networks. Under the current legal framework, libraries need to
obtain the authorisation of the rights holders
toorganisesuche-lending activities. In various Member States,
publishers and libraries are currently experimenting with
different business models for the making available of works
online, including direct supply of e-books to libraries by
publishers or bundling byaggregators.

(a)[In particular if you are alibrary:]Have you experienced
specific problems when trying tonegotiate agreements to enable
the electronic lending(e-lending), including across borders,
ofbooks or other materials held in your collection?

(b)[In particular if you are an enduser/consumer:]Haveyou
experienced specific problems when trying to borrow booksor
other materialselectronically (e-lending), including across
borders,from institutionssuch as public libraries?

(c)[In particular if you are aright holder:]Have you negotiated
agreements with libraries to enable them to lend books or other
materials electronically, including across borders?

YES – Please explainwith specific examples

NO

Please note our comment to the Question 32.

NO OPINION

If there are problems, how wouldtheybestbe solved?

[Open question]

Please note our comment to the Question 32, 33 & 34.

The following two questions are relevant bothtothis point (n° 3)
and the previous one (n° 2).

[In particular if you are an institutional user:]What
differences do you see in the management of physical and online
collections, including providing access to your subscribers?
What problems have you encountered?

[Open question]

Please note our comment to the Question 39.

[In particular if you are a right holder:]What difference do you
see betweenlibraries’traditional activities such as on-premises
consultation or public lending and activities such as
off-premises (online, at a distance) consultation and
e-lending? What problems have you encountered?

[Open question]

In regard to current issues of newspapers and magazines and the
archives of press material made available online, the change of
the current scope of that exception would mean the introduction
of a mechanism of unfair competition towards press publishers.
An easy way to see press content made available online by the
publishers in a commercial manner, without leaving one’s home,
via the library website, would entirely ruin, already poorly
performing digital press market in Poland. The issue of a
possibility of introducing paid-for licenses should be
thoroughly analysed. The permanent access to press content via
a website is an entirely different matter than a temporary use
of the work’s copy borrowed from a library. It is sufficient to
produce one digital file with the newspaper content, place it on
a library server and provide link to the content for everybody
to see. Who will finance, however, the creation of such a
newspaper?

Mass digitisation

The term “mass digitisation” is normally used to refer to
efforts by institutions such as libraries and archives to
digitise (e.g. scan) the entire content or part of their
collections with an objective to preserve these collections
and, normally, to make them available to the public. Examples
are efforts by libraries to digitise novels form the early part
of the 20thcentury or whole collections of pictures of
historical value. This matter has been partly addressed at the
EU level by the 2011 Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) on key
principles on the digitisationand making available of out
of commerce works (i.e. works which are no longer found in the
normal channels of commerce),whichisaimingto facilitatemass
digitisation efforts (for books and learned journals) on the
basis of licence agreements between libraries and similar
cultural institutions on the one hand and the collecting
societies representing authors and publishers on the other44

You will find more information about his MoU on the following
website:http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/copyright/out-of-commerce/index_en.htm.

.Provided the required funding is ensured(digitisation projects
are extremely expensive),the result of this MoU should bethat
books that are currently to be found only in the archives of,
for instance, libraries will be digitised and made available
online to everyone.The MoU is based on voluntary licences
(granted by Collective Management Organisations on the basis of
the mandates they receive from authors and publishers). Some
Member States may need to enact legislation to ensure the
largest possible effect ofsuchlicences (e.g. by establishing in
legislation a presumption of representation of a collecting
society or the recognition of an “extended effect” to the
licences granted)45

France and Germany have already adopted legislation to back the
effects of the MoU.The French act (LOI n° 2012-287 du 1er mars
2012 relative à l'exploitation numérique des livres
indisponibles du xxe siècle) foresees collectivemanagement,
unless the author or publisher in question opposes such
management.The German act (Gesetz zur Nutzung verwaister und
vergriffener Werke und einer weiteren Änderung des
Urheberrechtsgesetzes vom 1.Oktober 2013) contains a legal
presumption of representation by a collectingsociety in
relation to works whose rightholdersare not members of the
collecting society.

.

[In particular if you are an institutional user,engaging or
wanting to engage in mass digitisation projects,a
rightholder,acollective management organisation:]Woulditbe
necessaryin your country to enact legislationto ensure
thattheresults of the 2011 MoU (i.e. the agreements concluded
between libraries and collecting societies) havea cross-border
effect sothatout of commerce workscan be accessedacross the EU?

YES – Please explainwhy and how it could best be achieved

NO

The mass-digitalisation of newspaper content by public libraries
or by private companies may represent a risk to publishers’
ability to develop new business models in the digital
environment, and to monetise their content.

The 2011 MoU referred mostly to books since the press sector
operates in an entirely different way and newspapers digitalise
and provide access online to “old” content through their
archives and databases on commercial basis. In case of the
press, it is rather difficult to speak of the content “out of
commerce”.

NO OPINION

Would it be necessary to develop mechanisms, beyond those
already agreed for other typesof content (e.g.for audio- or
audio-visual collections, broadcasters’ archives)?

YES – Please explain

NO

Mass digitalisation of newspaper content by public libraries or
by private companies represents a considerable risk to
publishers’ ability to make contractual agreements with their
partners, in order to monetise their content and therefore
ensure that their titles can remain sustainable in both the
print and digital environment.

Providing new mechanisms for mass-digitalisation would represent
a direct threat to publishers’ economic sustainability and their
ability to respond adequately to digital challenges.

NO OPINION

Teaching

Directive 2001/29/EC46

Article 5(3)aof Directive 2001/29.

enables Member States to implement in their national
legislationlimitations and exceptionsfor the purpose of
illustration fornon-commercialteaching. Such exceptions would
typically allow a teacher to use parts of or full works to
illustrate his course,e.g.by distributing copies of fragments
of a book or of newspaper articles in the classroom or by
showing protected content on a smart boardwithout having to
obtain authorisation from the right holders.The open
formulation of this (optional) provision allows for rather
different implementation at Member States level.The
implementation of the exception differs from Member State to
Member State, with several Member States providinginsteada
frameworkfor the licensing of contentforcertain
educationaluses. Some argue that the lawshould provide for
better possibilities for distance learningand study at home.

(a)[In particular if youare an enduser/consumeror an
institutional user:]Have you experienced specific problems when
trying to use works orother subject-matter for illustration for
teaching, including across borders?

(b)[In particular if youarearight holder:]Have
youexperiencedspecificproblems resulting from the wayin
whichworks or other subject-matter are used for illustration
for teaching, including across borders?

YES–Please explain

NO

Newspaper publishers understand the exception set out in Article
5(3)(a) as being a narrow exception to the exclusive rights,
aimed at enabling exactly what it states: to illustrate, which
is far from being the same as planned producing of teaching
material.Teaching material in whatever format, including
multiple copying for classroom use, cannot and is not desired
to be made under this exception, as it would definitely
undermine the normal exploitation of these works.

NO OPINION

If there are problems, how wouldtheybestbe solved?

[Open question]

There are no problems.

What mechanisms exist in the market place to facilitate the use
of content for illustration for teaching purposes?How
successful are they?

[Open question]

Publishers of newspapers and news media have been pioneers in
promoting the use of content for teaching purposes. The role of
news media publishers in improving media literacy through
various programmes, particularly in schools, was recognised in
the 2009 European Commission recommendation on media literacy
(2009/625/EC).

The newspaper sector in Poland has been active for many years at
national level in specially developed “Newspaper in Education”
programmes in primary and secondary schools. The regional press
is running the campaign “Schools without Violence” and
nationwide newspapers are engaged in various educational
projects. The most important of them is the project by “Gazeta
Wyborcza” entitled “The School with Class”. Newspapers also
actively participate in education events, which are annual
tests organised at the end of the primary school education. The
day after final exams, the test questionnaires are published
with correct answers and during a school year, many samples of
tests and educational material are being publicised.

Due to the efforts of publishers, news media content in both
print and digital formats plays an essential role in teaching
programmes that focus on the ability of citizens to inform
themselves and to analyse current social, political and
economic developments.

In the digital era, these projects have shown to be really
helpful to media users to develop understanding of how and why
media content is produced and to evaluate the trustworthiness
of different sources. These programmes both help young people
approach media content, distinguish between fact and opinion,
and between editorial and advertising, as well as teaching them
how to create their own press content

If your view is that a legislative solution is needed, what
would be its main elements? Which activities of the beneficiary
institutions should be coveredand underwhatconditions?

[Open question]

NO.

If your view is thatadifferent solutionisneeded, what would it
be?

[Open question]

Press in Poland would be keen to accept government support for
media literacy projects with newspaper presence in schools.

Research

Directive 2001/29/EC47

Article 5(3)a of Directive 2001/29.

enables Member States to choose whether to implement in their
national laws a limitation for the purpose of non-commercial
scientific research.Theopenformulation of this (optional)
provision allows forratherdifferent implementationsat Member
States level.

(a)[In particular if you arean enduser/consumeror an
institutional user:]Haveyou experienced specific problems when
trying to use works or other subject matter in thecontextof
research projects/activities, including across borders?

(b)[In particular if you area right
holder:]Haveyouexperiencedspecificproblemsresulting from the
wayin whichworks or other subject-matter are usedin
thecontextof research projects/activities, including across
borders?

YES–Please explain

NO

NO OPINION

If there are problems, how wouldtheybestbe solved?

[Open question]

What mechanisms exist in the Member States to facilitate the use
of content for research purposes?How successful are they?

[Open question]

Publishers’ Association REPROPOL is currently developing license
solution enabling access – often free of charge or for minimal
fee – to newspaper content for researchers and
scientificinstitutions in order to conduct scientific studies.
The publishers undertake efforts to make such licenses easer to
obtain and more effective.

Disabilities

Directive 2001/29/EC48

Article 5 (3)b of Directive 2001/29.

provides for an exception/limitation for the benefit of people
with a disability.The open formulation of this (optional)
provision allows for rather different implementationsat Member
States level.At EU and international level projects have been
launched to increase the accessibilityof works and other
subject-matterforpersons with disabilities (notably by
increasing the number of works published in special formats and
facilitating their distribution across the European Union)49

The European Trusted Intermediaries Network (ETIN)resulting
froma Memorandum of Understanding betweenrepresentatives of the
right-holder community (publishers, authors, collecting
societies) and interested parties such as associations for
blind and dyslexic
persons(http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/copyright/initiatives/access/index_en.htm)
and the Trusted Intermediary Global Accessible Resources (TIGAR)
project in WIPO (http://www.visionip.org/portal/en/).

.

The Marrakesh Treaty50

MarrakeshTreaty to Facilitate Access to Published Works by
Visually Impaired Persons and Persons with Print
Disabilities,Marrakesh, June 17 to 282013.

has been adopted to facilitate access to published works for
persons who are blind, visually impaired, or otherwise print
disabled. The Treaty creates a mandatory exception to copyright
that allows organisations for the blind to produce, distribute
and make available accessible format copies to visually
impaired persons without the authorisation of the rightholders.
The EU and its Member Stateshave startedwork to sign and ratify
the Treaty. This may require the adoption of certain provisions
at EU level (e.g. to ensure the possibility to exchange
accessible format copies across borders).

(a)[Inparticular if you are a person with a disability or an
organisation representing persons with disabilities:]Have you
experienced problems with accessibility to content, including
across borders,arising from Member States’ implementation of
this exception?

(b)[Inparticular if you are an organisationproviding services
for persons with disabilities:]Have you experienced problems
when distributing/communicating works published in special
formats across the EU?

(c)[In particular if you are arightholder:]Have you
experiencedspecificproblems resulting fromthe application of
limitations or exceptions allowing for the
distribution/communication of works published in special
formats, including across borders?

YES–Please explainby giving examples

NO

Exceptions and limitations in favour of persons, who are blind,
visually impaired or otherwise print disabled, exist in all EU
Member States. Also publishers offer licensing agreements to
facilitate access to copyright published works for those user
groups.

In the EU Member States, exceptions for persons with
disabilities, especially visually impaired persons and persons
with print disabilities are included in national copyright laws
according to legal traditions of each country. Polish Publishers
believe that the exceptions and limitations in the current EU
copyright framework are well applied and respected in various
Member States. In addition, publishers have concluded
successfullicensing agreements with different categories of
users (schools, libraries, health organisations, etc.), which
address their specific needs and expectations in the digital
and print environment.

Publishers are aware of many barriers in access to information
experienced by persons who have partial vision and who have
print disabilities. Publishers support the objective that
visually impaired person/persons with print disabilities will
have access to information.

The main challenge is linked to the cross-border exchange of
accessible format copies. The WIPO Treaty to Facilitate Access
to Published Works for Persons who are Blind, Visually Impaired
or otherwise Print Disabled, will undoubtedly contribute to the
enhancement of the cross-border exchange of such copies. It
will, however, take time for the Treaty to come into force and
be implemented in national legislation. Also, it may not alone
solve all challenges.

We believe that any initiative in this field should be focused
directly on improving accessibility, fully taking into account
the national character of copyright law in the Member States,
and ensuring that the accessible format copy is used
exclusively by beneficiary persons. Such an instrument must
remain fair in its application to commercially available
newspaper content, with the prior authorisation of the rights
holder.

Newspaper publishers are involved and/or are open to discussions
and voluntary agreements with authorised entities and other
stakeholders at national level in order to find balanced
voluntary partnerships agreements, which enable the authorised
authorities to fulfil their mission, while at the same time,
respecting copyright legislation and not undermining
publishers’ commercial activities with respect to their
content.

It is of a fundamental importance that any agreement reached
regarding the digitalisation and/or making available of a work
for the print disabled should be on a voluntary basis. We
believe that remuneration should be a part of any agreement,
unless the publisher chooses to proceed in another way.

NO OPINION

Ifthere are problems, what could be done to improve
accessibility?

[Open question]

Publishers believe that the appropriate solution to provide
newspaper content for the print disabled is not more
legislation but licensing on a voluntary basis and cooperation
between publishers and authorised authorities, as is already
the case in a number of Member States.

What mechanisms exist in the market place to facilitate
accessibility to content? How successful are they?

[Open question]

It is clear that considerable resources are required to make
works accessible to visually impaired persons and persons with
print disabilities. We think that public institutions and
governments have an important role to play in providing
sufficient technical and financial means to authorised entities
representing persons with print disabilities, as this is a part
of the public sector and the public mission of the state.

Text and data mining

Text and data mining/content mining/data analytics51

For the purpose of the present document, the term “text and data
mining” will be used.

are different terms used to describe increasingly important
techniques used in particular by researchers for the
exploration of vast amounts of existing texts and data (e.g.,
journals, web sites, databases etc.). Through the use of
software or other automated processes, an analysis is made of
relevant texts and data in order to obtain new insights,
patterns and trends.

The texts and data used for mining are either freely accessible
on the internet or accessible through subscriptions to e.g.
journals and periodicals that give access to the databases of
publishers. A copy is made of the relevant texts and data (e.g.
on browser cache memories or in computers RAM memories or onto
the hard disk of a computer), prior to the actual analysis.
Normally, it is considered that to mine protected works or
other subject matter, it is necessary to obtain authorisation
fromtherightholdersfor the making of such copiesunless such
authorisation can be implied (e.g. content accessible to
general public without restrictions on the internet,
openaccess).

Some argue that the copies required for text and data mining are
covered by the exception for temporary copies in Article 5.1 of
Directive 2001/29/EC. Others consider that text and data mining
activities should not even be seen as covered by copyright. None
of thisis clear, in particular since text and data mining does
not consist only of a single method, but can be undertaken in
several different ways. Important questions also remain as to
whether the main problems arising in relation to this issue go
beyond copyright (i.e. beyond the necessity or not to obtain
the authorisation to use content) and relate rather to the need
to obtain “access” to content (i.e. being able to use e.g.
commercial databases).

A specific Working Group was set up on this issue in the
framework of the "Licences for Europe" stakeholder dialogue. No
consensus was reached among participating stakeholders on either
the problems to be addressed or the results. At the same time,
practical solutions to facilitate text and data mining of
subscription-based scientific content were presented by
publishers as an outcome of “Licences for Europe”52

See the document “Licences for Europe – tenpledges to bring more
content
online”:http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/copyright/docs/licences-for-europe/131113_ten-pledges_en.pdf.

.In the context of these discussions, other stakeholders argued
that no additional licences should be required to mine material
to which access has been provided through a
subscriptionagreement and considered that a specific exception
for text and data mining should beintroduced, possibly on the
basis of a distinction between commercial and non-commercial.

(a)[In particular if you are an enduser/consumeror an
institutional user:]Haveyou experiencedobstacles,linked to
copyright,when trying to usetext or data miningmethods,
including across borders?

(b)[In particular if you are aservice provider:]Have you
experienced obstacles, linked to copyright, when providing
services based on text or data mining methods, including across
borders?

(c)[In particular if you are a rightholder:]Have you
experiencedspecificproblems resulting fromthe useof textand
data mining in relation to copyright protected content,
including across borders?

YES

Publishers of newspapers and news media have not experienced
specific problems from the use of text and data mining (TDM) in
relation to copyright protected content, when TDM access is
provided for scientific research purposes via licensing models
developed by the publishing industry and the licensing
organisations with whom they work.

There is, however, serious potential for problems resulting from
the use of text and data mining in relation to copyright
protected content, in cases when TDM access is not a managed
process via licensing models. In the first place, publishers
should retain the right to decide how their content may and may
not be re-used by others. It is vital for the long-term
sustainability of the publishing industries that the end
results of any research do not become a substitute for the
published content. This would inevitably jeopardise continued
investment by publishers in authoritative content, which in
turn helps to promote advances in research.

Secondly, especially since many publishing houses are small and
medium-sized enterprises, TDM access has to be a managed
process in order to avoid disruption of different platforms
used by publishers. In his context, it is important that
potential miners continue to keep in touch with publishers to
achieve the best outcome for their research, given that the
different platforms used by publishers have different
capabilities. It is necessary to avoid any potential disruption
or degradation to these platforms, which may happen when
unmanaged mining takes place without publisher support.

Thirdly, from the perspective of press publishers, any potential
exception for TDM could be misused by news aggregators and media
monitoring companies in order to avoid the necessity of
licensing their activities

NO–Please explain

NO OPINION

If there are problems, how wouldtheybestbe solved?

[Open question]

If your view is that a legislative solution is needed, what
would be its main elements? Which activities should be
coveredand underwhatconditions?

[Open question]

If your view is thatadifferent solutionisneeded, what would it
be?

[Open question]

It is clearly to themutual benefit of both publishers of content
and miners to find licensing solutionswhich permit researchers
to mine works and allow them to do so as seamlessly and as
easily as possible, while securing the publishers’ investments
in their publications.

European Commission’s “Licences for Europe” Working Group 4 on
text and data mining explored solutions such as standard
licensing models, as well as technology platforms to facilitate
TDM access, with the aim of promoting the efficient use of TDM
for scientific research purposes. Several participants
presented a range of practical and innovative solutions, which
represent the result of major investment by the publishing
industry and the licensing organisations with whom they work.
Some of these initiatives are already successfully being used
by publishers and researchers while others are being launched
now or being piloting with a view to being launched in the
coming months.

These initiatives include a sample license clause presented by
STM, which allows publishers to easily provide a quick answer
to requests made by the scientific community to be able to text
and datamine content for which they have a subscription. Other
initiatives include PLS Clear, a digital clearing house
initiative from the UK’s Publishers Licensing Society (PLS)
developed with the assistance of a group of leading publishers
and researchers, which connects researchers and publishers to
further simplify TDM. Crossref’s Prospect initiative shows that
thanks to technical innovations TDM for research for
non-commercial purposes is possible via a click-through
licence, as is the Copyright Clearance Centre (CCC) pilot TDM
service concerning both subscribed and non-subscribed content
for commercial researchers, set for commercial release in 2014.
“PDR” licenses have also been successfully developed for the
pharmaceutical industry for commercial uses.

Publishers continue to be open to discussing and finding
licensing solutions together with the research community, to
facilitate text and data mining with the potential to further
research. As outlined in presentations to Working Group 4,
publishers and researchers are already benefitting from the
solutions that have been developed to date.Publisherswelcomes
these innovative solutions and the continued work in this field
and believes that this non-legislative approach represents the
most constructive way forward for both the researchers and
publishers concerned.

Are there other issues, unrelated to copyright, that constitute
barriers to the use of text or data mining methods?

[Open question]

User-generated content

Technological and service developments mean that citizens can
copy, use and distribute content at little to no financial
cost. As a consequence, new types of online activities are
developing rapidly, including the making of so-called
“user-generated content”. While users can create totally
original content,theycan also take one or several pre-existing
works, change somethinginthe work(s), and upload the result on
the Internet e.g. to platforms and blogs53

A typical example could be the “kitchen” or “wedding” video
(adding one's own video to a pre-existing sound recording), or
adding one's own text to a pre-existing photograph.Other
examples are “mash-ups” (blending two sound recordings), and
reproducing parts of journalistic work (report, review etc.) in
a blog.

. User-generated content (UGC) can thus coverthe modification of
pre-existing works even if the newly-generated/"uploaded" work
does notnecessarilyrequire a creative effort and results from
merely adding, subtracting or associating some pre-existing
content with other pre-existing content. This kind ofactivityis
not “new” as such. However, the development of social networking
and social media sitesthatenable users to share content widely
has vastly changed the scale of such activities and increased
the potential economic impact forthose holding rights inthe
pre-existing works. Re-use is no longer the preserve of
a technically and artistically adept elite. With the
possibilities offered by the new technologies,re-use is open to
all, at no cost.This in turn raises questionswith regard to
fundamental rights suchthe freedom of expression and theright
to property.

A specific Working Group was set up on this issue in the
framework of the"Licences for Europe" stakeholder dialogue. No
consensuswas reachedamong participating stakeholders on either
the problems tobe addressed or the resultsor even the
definition of UGC.Nevertheless, awide range of viewswere
presentedas to the best way to respond to this phenomenon.
Oneviewwasto say that a new exception is needed to cover UGC,in
particular non-commercial activities by individuals such as
combining existing musical works with videos, sequences of
photos, etc.Anotherview wasthat no legislative change is
needed: UGC is flourishing, and licensing schemes are
increasingly available (licence schemes concluded between
rightholders and platforms as well as micro-licences concluded
between rightholders and the usersgenerating thecontent. In any
event, practical solutions to ease user-generatedcontent and
facilitate micro-licensing for small users werepledgedby
rightholders across different sectors as a result of the
“Licences for Europe” discussions54

See the document “Licences for Europe – tenpledges to bring more
content
online”:http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/copyright/docs/licences-for-europe/131113_ten-pledges_en.pdf.

.

(a)[In particular if you are an enduser/consumer:]Have you
experienced problems when trying to use pre-existing works or
other subject matter to disseminate new content on the
Internet, including across borders?

(b)[In particular if you are aservice provider:]Have you
experienced problems when users publish/disseminatenew content
based on the pre-existing works or other subject-matter through
your service, including across borders?

(c)[In particular if you are a right holder:]Have you
experiencedproblems resulting from the waythe usersare using
pre-existing works or other subject-matter to disseminate new
content on the Internet, including across borders?

YES – Please explain by giving examples

NO

In response to, and in some cases in anticipation of their
readers’ needs, press publishers are heavily investing time and
resources in digital innovations, so that consumers are today
able to read and interact with the trusted, professional
content at any time of the day in a range of different formats
and via various devices. As a result, the press is now
available on all platforms and is more interactive than ever
before.

Press publishers recognize and welcome that press publishing is
a two-way dialogue in today’s digital environment.
User-generated content (UGC) in the press-publishing sector
concerns, on the one hand, what users do with publishers’
content and, on the other hand, how publishers then choose to
interact with that content. In summary:

Readers choose to share content with publishers in order that
they can contribute to democratic debate, for example, by
providing text, photographs and video via publishers’ websites
or applications on various devices in relation to news events.

In the digital environment, press publishers want users to
engage with professionally produced content in ways that were
not previously possible, recognizing the richness and depth of
debate that can arise from this approach. An increasing number
of press publishers actively encourage this dynamic interaction
with the users, to the benefit of both parties.

UGC has proven to be truly helpful in providing spontaneous
material and feedback from the public’s perspective, in
addition to professionally produced journalistic content, which
is trusted by readers. This is particularly the case for live
events and certainly to those rare and more extreme situations,
where the access of journalists has been restricted.

With greater and more integrated use of UGC in mind, many
publishers have redesigned their digital layouts in order to
meet the expectations of the public and increase traffic, for
instance, by giving predominance to live blogging or other ways
of the public engaging with their newspaper or magazine. Citizen
participation supported by press publishers creates a valuable
societal dynamic and the collaboration between UGC and quality
professional journalism represents a new and fascinating
chapter for publishing and journalism.

NO OPINION

(a)[In particular if you are an end user/consumer or aright
holder:]Have you experienced problems when trying to ensure
that the work you have created (on the basis of pre-existing
works) is properly identified for online use?Are proprietary
systems sufficient in this context?

YES, proprietary systems are sufficient. Where users want to
submit content to publishers for publication, publishers
provide for terms and conditions, which set out the uses the
publishers may undertake with the shared content, should they
choose to provide their content. Publishers are increasingly
promoting awareness of such terms and conditions.

It is clear from the above that engaging with UGC in some
capacity is now part of the daily business of publishing for
many publishing houses, with this two-way dialogue being
beneficial for both publishers and users. By facilitating
easier access to their content for users, this allows
publishers to enjoy much closer contact with their readership.

Specifically, press publishers are keen to facilitate and
promote users’ access to content, participation and interaction
by adopting tools to provide comments, upload photos, and share
links to social media and elsewhere. This approach is very much
at the heart of the press in today’s digital environment. For
example, press publishers are increasingly choosing to provide
“share” and “recommend” buttons and encourage users to share
professional press content with others, with a variety of news
platforms offering easy ways of doing so. They clear, as
required, rights relating to various contributors to their
content in order to enable such use by users.

This approach to sharing selected content means that publishers
can better understand how far articles are being shared and
which are most popular, etc., but importantly, does not pose a
risk to their sustainability, as unlimited copying and pasting
of all their content for sharing would do.

(b)[In particular if you are a service provider:]Do you provide
possibilities for users that are publishing/disseminating the
works they have created (on the basis of pre-existing works)
through your service to properly identify these works for
online use?

YES – Please explain

NO

NO OPINION

(a)[In particular if you are an enduser/consumeror aright
holder):]Have you experienced problems when trying to be
remunerated for the use of the work you have created (on the
basis of pre-existing works)?

(b)[In particular if you are a service provider:]Do you provide
remuneration schemes for users publishing/disseminating the
works they have created (on the basis of pre-existing works)
through your service?

YES – Please explain

NO – Please explain.

 NO OPINION

If there are problems, how would theybestbe solved?

[Open question]

If your view is that a legislative solution is needed, what
would be its main elements? Which activities should be
coveredand underwhatconditions?

[Open question]

Presspublishers do not see the need for a legislative initiative
regarding UGC.

If your view is thatadifferent solutionisneeded, what would it
be?

[Open question]

Press publishers who are contacted by users wishing to use their
content typically provide licenses for use of the content. These
licenses are often free as long as it is not for commercial
exploitation.

Private copying and reprography

Directive 2001/29/EC enables Member States to implement in their
national legislation exceptions or limitations to the
reproduction right for copies made for private useand
photocopying55

Article 5. 2)(a) and (b)of Directive 2001/29.

.Levies are charges imposed at national level on goods typically
used forsuch purposes(blank media, recording equipment,
photocopying machines, mobile listening devices such as mp3/mp4
players, computers, etc.) with a viewtocompensating rightholders
forthe harm they suffer whencopiesaremade
withouttheirauthorisation by certain categories of persons
(i.e. natural persons making copies for their private use)
orthroughuse of certain technique (i.e. reprography).In that
context, levies are importantforrightholders.

With the constant developments in digital technology, the
question arises as to whether the copying of files
byconsumers/end-userswho have purchasedcontent online -e.g.
when a person has bought an MP3 fileandgoes on
tostoremultiplecopies of thatfile(in her computer, her tablet
and her mobile phone)-alsotriggers, or should trigger,the
application of private copying levies. It is argued that, in
some cases,these leviesmay indeedbe claimedby
rightholderswhetheror notthelicence feepaid by the service
provideralready covers copies made bythe enduser.
Thisapproachcould potentially lead to instances of double
payments whereby levies could be claimed on top ofservice
providers’licencefees56

Communication "Unleashing the Potential of Cloud Computing in
Europe", COM(2012) 529 final.

57

These issues were addressed in the recommendations of Mr António
Vitorino resulting from the mediation on private copying and
reprography levies.Youcan consult these recommendationson the
following
website:http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/copyright/docs/levy_reform/130131_levies-vitorino-recommendations_en.pdf.

.

There is also an on-going discussion as to the application or
not of levies to certain types ofcloud-based services such as
personal lockers or personal video recorders.

In your view, is there a need to clarifyat the EU levelthe scope
and application of theprivate copyingand reprographyexceptions58

Art. 5.2(a) and 5.2(b) of Directive 2001/29/EC.

in the digital environment?

YES–Please explain

NO

In the print environment, in most EU Member States, publishers
generally rely on Reprographic Rights’ Organisations (RROs) to
manage their reprographic rights. In the digital environment,
however, in various Member States, publishing companies have
developed different services that offer, license and give
access to copyrighted works such as articles, photographs,
etc., through publishers’ websites and databases or archive
services. It is important to underline that for both print and
digital works, publishers should be free to choose between
collective and individual rights management. However, whenever
direct licensing is not an option, for example, when it becomes
burdensome for both users and right holders, levies have a
specific task when publishers are unable to authenticate
reproduction of works. Levies play an effective role when
licensing is burdensome or impossible, notably in cases of
reprography and private copying.

NO OPINION

Should digital copies made by end users for private purposes in
the context of a service that has been licensed by
rightholders, and where theharmto the rightholder is minimal,
be subject to private copying levies?59

This issue was also addressed in the recommendations of Mr
Antonio Vitorino resulting from the mediation on private
copying and reprography levies

 YES – Please explain

 NO – Please explain

 NO OPINION

The answer cannot be responded by a simple yes or no. The
European Court of Justice (CJEU) decided in theVG WORTcase
(C-457/11-C460/11) that a possible consent by the copyright
holder to the copying of his work or other protected material
in the context of the exceptions or limitations provided for in
EU Directive on Copyright (Art. 5(2) and 5(3) has no effect on
fair remuneration payable under the exception. This means that
remuneration paid to the author or publisher under a license
does not preclude from receiving the fair compensation for the
exception or limitation. Such copies may therefore be covered
by the levies.

How wouldchanges inlevieswith respect to the application
toonline services (e.g.services based oncloud computing
allowing, for instance,usersto have copieson different
devices)impactthe development and functioning ofnewbusiness
modelson the one hand and rightholders’ revenue on the other?

[Open question]

Where authors and publishers are remunerated for certain uses on
the basis of copyright levies, the device and storage medium
remuneration is also payable if protected works are copied in
connection with online services (e.g. cloud computing). That
is, for example, the case if works are downloaded from a cloud
portal and stored on a PC or storage medium. In countries where
text levies exist, it would be appropriate that consideration is
given to whether new possibilities of remuneration for authors
and publishers need to be introduced in view of the increasing
use of cloud services in the form of streaming, which does not
result in permanent storage.

Would you see an added value in making levies visibleon the
invoices for products subject to levies?60

This issue was also addressed in the recommendations of Mr
Antonio Vitorino resulting from the mediation on private
copying and reprography levies.

YES–Please explain

NO–Please explain

NO OPINION

Reprographic levies in Poland are covered by a permanent
percentage remuneration calculated on the basis of device or
product value established by an importer or manufacturer
(importer’s purchasing price /cost of manufacturing device).
Hence, this value could be specified only in relations between
importer/manufacturer and a distributor. Moreover, the values
of all margins from a manufacturer up to retail seller would be
visible, and this could infringe trade secrets of entrepreneurs
(knowing the value of the reprographic levy and having
knowledge of what percent of the device’s price it makes, the
import price or the price of the device’s manufacturing would
also be known). Therefore, this solution would have an added
value only if the reprographic levy would be established in
relation to the retail seller’s price

Divergingnational systems levy different products and apply
different tariffs. This results in obstacles tothefree
circulation of goods and servicesin the Single Market.At the
same time, many Member States continue to
allowtheindiscriminate application of private copying levies to
all transactions irrespective of the person to whom the product
subject to a levyis sold(e.g. private person or business). In
that context, not all Member States have ex ante exemption
and/orex post reimbursement schemes which could remedy these
situations and reduce the number of undue payments61

This issue was also addressed in the recommendations of Mr
Antonio Vitorino resulting from the mediation on private
copying and reprography levies.

.

Have you experienced a situation whereacross-border transaction
resulted inundue levy payments, or duplicate payments of the
same levy, or other obstacles to the free movement of goods or
services?

YES–Pleasespecify the type of transaction and indicate
thepercentageoftheundue payments. Please also indicatehowa
priori exemption and/orex post reimbursement schemes could help
to remedy the situation.

NO–Please explain

 NO OPINION

What percentage of products subject to a levy is sold to persons
other than natural persons for purposes clearly unrelated to
private copying? Do any of those transactions result in undue
payments? Please explain in detail the example you provide
(type of products, type of transaction, stakeholders, etc.).

[Open question]

In respect of text and image (reprography) levies, the question
is irrelevant, as noted also in the report from the
EC-appointed mediator Antonio Vitorino. Unlike the scope of the
privatecopying exception under EU Directive on Copyright (Art.
5(2)(b)), which is limited to reproductions that serve specific
purpose (“fair private use”), regardless of the type of device
or method, the reprography exception under EU Directive on
Copyright (Art. 5(2)(a)) covers reproductions on a specific
medium (paper), using a specific method (“any kind of
photographic technique”), regardless of its purpose, which may
be for professional, educational, private and other uses.

Consequently, when it comes to analysing the impact of
reprography levies, it is not relevant to make a distinction
between private and professional uses, since both of them are
subject to the payment of a levy. Against this background, it
is also necessary to distinguish between sales of devices in
the private and business sectors. The point is that copies are
permitted by law in both private and business spheres. The –
unified – device and storage medium remuneration can therefore
be justified both for sales to private persons and sales to
business end users.

Where such undue payments arise, what percentage of trade do
they affect? To what extent could a priori exemptionsand/orex
post reimbursement schemes existingin some Member Stateshelp to
remedy the situation?

[Open question]

We refer to our response to Question 69, which, in short, states
that under the EU Directive on Copyright (Art. 5(2)(a)), text
and image (reprography) levies also cover professional uses.
Therefore, Question 70 becomes irrelevant in relation to text
and image (reprography) levies.

Ifyou have identified specificproblemswith the
currentfunctioning of thelevy system, howwouldthese
problemsbestbesolved?

[Open question]

The main problem is the tendency to mix private copying levies
and text and image (reprography) levies, and to argue the
reprography levy as if it were identical to private copy
levies. This is not the case; the two levy schemes are
different (see Question 69). The EU could contribute to
clarification through sensitising EC officials and EU policy
makers and institutions that text and image (reprography) and
private levies are different, and ensure consistency in their
dealing with the two different levy schemes.

Fairremuneration of authors and performers

TheEUcopyrightacquisrecognises for authors and performers a
number of exclusive rights and, in the case of performers whose
performances are fixed in phonograms, remuneration rights. There
are few provisions in the EU copyright law governing
thetransferof rights from authors or performers to producers62

See e.g. Directive 92/100/EEC, Art.2(4)-(7).

or determining who the owner of the rights is when the work or
other subject matter is created in the context ofanemployment
contract63

See e.g.Art. 2.3. of Directive 2009/24/EC,Art. 4 of Directive
96/9/EC.

.Thisis an area that has been traditionally left for Member
States to regulate and there are significant differences in
regulatory approaches.Substantial differences also existbetween
differentsectors ofthecreative industries.

Concerns continue to be raised that authors and performers are
not adequately remunerated, in particularbut not solely, as
regards online exploitation. Many consider that the economic
benefit of new forms of exploitation is not being fairly shared
along the whole value chain. Another commonly raised issue
concerns contractual practices, negotiation mechanisms,
presumptions of transfer of rights, buy-out clauses and the
lack of possibility to terminate contracts. Some stakeholders
are of the opinion that rules atnational leveldonotsuffice to
improve their situation and that action at EU level is
necessary.

[In particular if you arean author/performer:] What is the best
mechanism (or combination of mechanisms) to ensurethatyou
receive an adequate remuneration for the exploitation of your
works and performances?

[Open question]

Istherea need to actat theEU level (for instance to prohibit
certain clauses in contracts)?

YES–Please explain

 NO

Publishers of newspaper and news media believe that it is
important to emphasise that respect for the freedom to contract
and to negotiate should be the fundamental basis of any approach
to this area. A cross-sector and pan-European approach to
employment practise in the press sector would represent a real
threat to the freedom to contract. Any proposal for a common
framework would not be an appropriate way to address contract
law, which has been built on the basis of sector specificities
and which has evolved in this context in various Member States.

Any EU initiatives in this field should therefore avoid a “one
size fits all” solution that would fail to take into account
the distinction between publishing, audio-visual content and
music, since the contractual relationships and rights’
management are organised differently in each sector.

Moreover, different concepts and legal situations exist in the
EU Member States when it comes to copyright and employment
practises, ownership and transfer of rights, as well as
presumption rights. Various concepts and approaches are used
because each corresponds to a different underlying legal
system.

InPolandsome publishers enter into collective negotiations at
national or company level with the union of professional
journalists to achieve collective agreements regarding press
content and the remuneration of journalistic work. In this
context, collective negotiation for the acquisition of rights
by publishers from their employees is closely linked to labour
law and employment contract law. Member States hold very
divergent views on the need for any harmonisation in this area.
It is, therefore, crucial that social dialogue in the newspaper
sector remains at national level and is not introduced at the
EU level.

In addition, Member States have political sensitivities in the
field of labour law which do not fall under Internal Market
legislation. According to the EU Treaties, remuneration is not
part of EU competence and therefore belongs to the exclusive
competence of Member States.

To sum up, publishers of newspapers and news media are not in
favour of any EU action in the field of contract law, in order
to allow the market develop its own solutions. Such an approach
would respect the legislation already in place in different
sub-categories ofcontract law and in different sectors, thus
preserving legal certainty. This would also be an appropriate
way to respect the freedom to contract.

NO OPINION

Ifyou consider that the current rules are not effective, what
would you suggest to addresstheshortcomingsyou identify?

[Open question]

Respectforrights

Directive 2004/48/EE64

Directive 2004/48/EC of the European Parliament and of the
Council of 29 April 2004 on the enforcement of intellectual
property rights.

provides for a harmonised framework for the civil enforcement of
intellectual property rights, including copyright and related
rights. The Commission has consulted broadly on this text65

You will find more information on the following
website:http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/iprenforcement/directive/index_en.htm

. Concerns have been raised as to whether some of its provisions
are still fit to ensure a proper respectforcopyright in the
digital age. On the one hand, the current measures seem to be
insufficient to deal with the new challenges brought by the
dissemination of digital content on the internet; on the other
hand, there are concerns about the current balance between
enforcement of copyright and the protection of fundamental
rights, in particular the right for a private life and data
protection. While it cannot be contested that enforcement
measures should always be available in caseofinfringement of
copyright, measures could be proposed to strengthen respect for
copyright when the infringed content is used for a commercial
purpose66

For example when the infringing content is offered on a website
which gets advertising revenues that depend on the volume of
traffic.

. One means to do this could be to clarify the role of
intermediaries in the IP infrastructure67

This clarification should not affect the liability regime of
intermediary service providers established by Directive
2000/31/EC on electronic commerce, which will remain unchanged.

. At the same time,there could beclarification of the
safeguardsforrespect of private life and data protection for
private users.

Shouldthe civil enforcement system in the EU be rendered more
efficient for infringements of copyright committed with a
commercial purpose?

YES –

NO –

YES/NO

A well-functioning IP protection and enforcement system is vital
if Europe is to achieve the full potential of a single digital
market that delivers jobs, growth and quality content to
consumers.

Infringements of intellectual property rights cause real
economic harm to the newspaper publishing sector and hold back
its potential for re-investment and growth. In view of the
current consultation, and considering the opportunities but
also challenges that the Internet continues to present, it is
very important for newspaper publishers to be able to rely in
quantitative research on the sector. In our view, this should
include an examination of the economic impact on publishers’
investments, as well as the financial impact and
long-termconsequences for society of unauthorised use of
content by third parties, including aggregators, search engines
and private companies, often for commercial gain.

Efficient enforcement mechanisms and procedures are essential to
a well-functioning intellectual property rights system.
Well-functioning IPR enforcement mechanisms are the best means
to fight against counterfeiting and piracy, make sure that
right holders and the society as a whole can fully enjoy the
benefits of the IP system, and protect consumer’s rights in
their purchasing decisions.

But it also should have to be taken under the consideration than
infringements for non-commercial purpose often create commercial
profits to seconds parties

NO OPINION

In particular,isthe current legal framework clear enough to
allow forsufficient involvement of intermediaries (such as
Internet service providers, advertising brokers, payment
service providers, domain name registrars, etc.) in inhibiting
online copyright infringements with a commercial purpose? If
not, whatmeasureswould be useful to foster the cooperation of
intermediaries?

[Open question]

Infringements of intellectual property rights in both the print
and digital environment must be addressed and for that matter,
a closer cooperation between all authorities and actors
involved, including intermediaries, is necessary. The content
of newspaper websites mainly includes editorial content, which
falls under the control and the responsibility of the publisher
and the editor-in-chief. This content follows national press
law, as well as ethical codes of conduct and self-regulation.
Newspaper publishers are of the opinion that judicial authority
should be the one, who can balance different rights and freedoms
concerned, including freedom of expression. Control of press
content by internet service providers would be considered as
censorship and therefore would pose a threat to digital press
freedom.

Does the current civil enforcement framework ensure that the
right balance is achieved between the right to have one’s
copyright respected and other rights such as the
protectionofprivate life and protection of personal data?

YES

It is important to underline the right balance between the
fundamental right of freedom of expression and effective
copyright protection online, which includes the possibility of
practical enforcement of rights against illegal reproductions
of press content.

A necessary precondition to enforce copyright is an effectively
enforceable right of information to identify the name and
address of the infringer, also in case of dynamic IP addresses.
In case of copyright infringements of newspaper content, it is
necessary to ensure that judicial decisions can be adequately
enforced and respected.

The Enforcement Directive has provided a broadly harmonised
civil framework in Europe regarding IPR infringements. It has
been an important and necessary tool for publishers. However,
uniform implementation of the Directive should be ensured, as
divergence betweenMember States still exists. IWPand its
members have not identified any specific problems with regard
to the Enforcement Directive but with certain aspects of
implementation of the current text of the Directive.

The right balance between the content control of internet access
providers and the digital freedom of press should be assured.

Enforcement measures of the Directive are complicated, costly
and timely.

Not enough consideration has been given by the EU legislator to
the interaction between data protection rules and
implementation of the Enforcement Directive, which leads to
inconsistencies and, in some cases, total lack of remedies for
IP rights at national level. This should be reflected in order
to ensure that rights holders are not deprived of effective
remedies wherever their rights are infringed.

Measures, procedures and remedies shall not be unnecessarily
complicated or costly or entail unreasonable time limits or
unwarranted delays.(Article 3(1) of the Directive, re. General
obligations).

However, some cases at national level (E.g. Copiepresse v.
Google) reveal that procedures might be delayed due to courts
having an overload of cases to address, which therefore has an
effect on the enforcement of the rights infringed and could be
to the advantage of the infringer.

The situation regarding damages awarded by the courts could be
improved

Damages awards are often not effectively deterring potential
infringers from engaging in illegal activities, particularly
because the damages awarded by courts fail to match the level
of potential profit made by such infringements.

NO–Please explain

NO OPINION

AsingleEU CopyrightTitle

The idea ofestablishing aunifiedEU CopyrightTitlehas
beenpresentin the copyright debate for quite some time
now,although views as to the merits andthefeasibility of suchan
objectiveare divided.Aunified EUCopyrightTitlewouldtotally
harmonise the area of copyright law in the EU and replace
national laws. There would then be a single EU title instead of
a bundle of national rights.Some seethisas the only manner in
which a truly Single Market for content protected by copyright
can be ensured,whileothersbelieve that the same
objectivecanbetterbe achieved by establishing a higher level of
harmonisation while allowing for a certain degree of flexibility
and specificity in Member States’legal systems.

ShouldtheEU pursue the establishment of asingle
EUCopyrightTitle,as a means of establishing a consistent
framework for rights and exceptions to copyright across the EU,
as well as a single framework for enforcement?

YES

NO

In respect of the copyright legal framework, the EU should
continue to pursue a pragmatic approach. Rather than
emphasizing on a single EU Copyright Title, the focus should be
on the adoption of an overall IPR strategy, especially given the
fact that the IPR intensive industries contribute over one third
of EU’s GDP and 90% of the EU’s export comes from IP intensive
industries.

Work on a single EU Copyright Title would require substantial
resources and unnecessarily distract focus from the important
work on an overall EU IP strategy. It isalso difficult to see
how it could be established on the basis of Article 118 of the
Lisbon Treaty (TFEU). The different traditions and systems,
which include both common and civil law practises benefit from
being maintained. Even if sufficient unanimity should be
reached amongst EU Member States as to the nature of the EU
copyright legislation, it is difficult to see that an
overarching EU Copyright Title is required.

NO OPINION

Should this be the next step in the development of copyright in
the EU? Does the current level of difference among the Member
State legislation mean that this is a longer term project?

[Open question]

NO.

Publishers of newspapers and news media believe that the WIPO
Treaty and Berne Convention together with CJEU case law already
provide an important degree of harmonisation in the copyright
field.

Other issues

The above questionnaire aimstoprovidea comprehensive
consultation on the most important matters relating to the
current EU legal framework for copyright.Shouldany important
matters have been omitted,we would appreciate if you could
bring them to our attention, so they can be properly addressed
in the future.

Are there any other important matters related to the EU legal
framework forcopyright?Pleaseexplainandindicatehow such matters
should be addressed.

[Open question]

The newspaper and news media sector was one of the first
creative sectors to offer its content in digital formats and
today, it is a sector in a rapid transformation that offers a
diverse range of authoritative content to European citizens on
a range of both print and digital platforms.

Despite many challenges facing the industry, some 100 million
newspapers are sold or distributed in Europe every day. With
the combined reach of print and digital formats, the overall
audience for our content has never been higher. Moreover, the
sector continues to play a vital role in democratic society and
in stimulating debate on the great issues facing European
citizens today.

One of the challenges facing newspaper publishers in the digital
environment is how to ensure that technology companies and other
third parties do not extract the value of their content, without
remuneration for those who created or invested in that content.
Effective IPR enforcement mechanisms and procedures are
essential to combat both piracy and parasitism, as well as to
ensure that rights holders and society at large can fully enjoy
the benefits of the IP system. The press is specifically
mentioned in the European Commission’s IPR Strategy under
paragraph 3 about Europe’s cultural heritage and fostering
media plurality.

Publishers of newspapers and news media believe that fair
competition, respect of copyright and value of content, as well
as equal search are indispensable conditions for the proper
functioning of the digital ecosystem, to the benefit of all
users and consumers. Today,technology platforms and search
engines have an enormous impact on which press content is
visible and accessible to citizens on the Internet.

Publishers of newspapers and news media believe that fair
competition and equal search are indispensable conditions for
the proper functioning of the digital ecosystem, to the benefit
of all users and consumers. Today, technology platforms and
search engines have an enormous impact on which press content
is visible and accessible to citizens on the Internet. In this
context, it is essential that search engines act in a neutral
way to ensure that all press content can be found without any
discrimination.

From the press perspective, we would also like to underline that
net neutrality guarantees the same quality of service and the
same possibility to reach digital users for all content,
applications and service providers, regardless of a company’s
financial capacity. Proposals currently under discussion at the
EU level, which would allow for content discrimination, would be
seriously detrimental to innovation, press diversity and
ultimately – democracy.

