


Public Consultation

on the review of the EU copyright rules

Please identify yourself:

Name:

Digisam – a secretariat for National coordination of
digitisation, digital preservation and digital access to
cultural heritage in Sweden.

  

Digisam started its work in the autumn of 2011 and is organized
as a department at the National Archives of Sweden. The main
task is to promote the achievement of the objectives of the
national strategy for digitisation.

 

General guidelines, proposals for division of responsibility and
how an integrated digital information management and a
coordinated and cost-effective preservation should be designed
are also key issues for Digisam to handle.

 

Digisam is therefore assigned the role of a broad resource for
questions about digitisation, digital preservation and digital
accessibility.Digisam will:  

Monitor and evaluate the institution’s work within the task of
the national strategy

Work with issues of standards and systems for digital
preservation,

Conducting business intelligence, and collect and disseminate
current research in the field of digitisation and otherwise
support authorities and institutions

Establish and arrange contacts with relevant organisations and
private actors

Work with and inform the participating authorities and
institutions on the relevant issues of intellectual property
rights

Participate in working groups within the EU dealing with issues
of digitisation   

Explore possibilities for EU funding  Provide support with
communication, seminar and training courses to participating
agencies and institutions

 

Digisam’s mission is focused on the24 Swedishstate authorities
andcultural heritageinstitutions, but the goal is that the
results of the work will be beneficial and useful for anyone
working with digitisation and the use of digital cultural
heritage information. Therefore Digisam invite representatives
from the private sector and civil society with an interest and
involvement in digitisation issues to participate in the work.

If your organisation is not registered, you have the opportunity
toregister now.Responses from organisations not registered will
be published separately.

If you would like to submit your reply on an anonymous basis
pleaseindicate it belowby underlining thefollowinganswer:

Yes, I would like to submit my reply on an anonymous basis

Type of respondent(Pleaseunderlinethe appropriate):

Institutional user(e.g. school,university,
researchcentre,library, archive)ORRepresentativeof
institutional users

for the purposes of this questionnaire normally referred to
in questions as"institutional users"

Rights and the functioning of the Single Market

Why is it not possible to accessmanyonline content servicesfrom
anywhere in Europe?

[In particular if you arean enduser/consumer:]Have you faced
problems whentryingto access online services in an EU Member
State other than the one in which you live?

NO OPINION

[In particular if you area service provider:]Have you faced
problems when seeking to provide online services across
bordersin the EU?

NO OPINION

[In particular if you area right holder or acollective
management organisation:]Howoftenare youaskedtogrant
multi-territorial licences?Pleaseindicate, if possible, the
number of requests per yearand provide examples indicating the
Member State, the sector and the type of content concerned.

[Open question]

Answer:No opinion.

If you have identified problems in the answers to any of the
questions above – what would be the bestway to tacklethem?

[Open question]

Answer:No opinion.

[In particular if you area right holder or acollective
management organisation:]Are there reasons why, evenin cases
where you holdall thenecessaryrights forall theterritoriesin
question,youwould still find it necessaryor justifiedto impose
territorial restrictions onaservice provider (in order, for
instance, to ensure that access to certain content is not
possible in certainEuropeancountries)?

NO OPINION

[In particular if you aree.g. a broadcasterora service
provider:]Are there reasons why,evenin cases where you have
acquiredall thenecessaryrights for all the territoriesin
question,youwould still find it necessaryor justifiedto impose
territorial restrictions on the service recipient (in order for
instance, to redirect the consumer to a different website than
the one he is trying to access)?

 NO OPINION

Do you think that further measures (legislative or
non-legislative, including market-led solutions) are needed at
EU level to increase the cross-border availability of content
services in the Single Market, while ensuring an adequate level
ofprotection for right holders?

NO OPINION

Is there a need for more clarityas regardsthe scope ofwhat needs
to be authorised (or not) in digital transmissions?Theact
of“making available”

Isthe scope of the“making available”right in cross-border
situations – i.e. when content is disseminated across borders
–sufficiently clear?

NO OPINION

[In particular if you are a right holder:]Coulda clarification
of the territorial scope of the“making available”right have
aneffect on therecognition of yourrights (e.g.whetheryou are
considered to be an author or not,whetheryou are considered to
have transferred your rights or not),onyourremuneration,
oronthe enforcement of rights(including the availability of
injunctive relief1

Injunctive relief is a temporary or permanent remedy allowing
the right holder to stop or prevent an infringement of his/her
right.

)?

NO OPINION

Two rights involved in a single act of exploitation

[In particular if youa service provider or a right holder:]Does
the application of two rights toa single act of economic
exploitation in the online environment (e.g. a download)create
problemsfor you?

YES

Answer:In digital transmission, it is reallyjust the fact that
the digital copyof the workreaches the beneficiaries that is
essential. The temporary copy that occurs“on the road”,
depending on how the digital copyis transferred, are
uninteresting. Likewise,the manner in which the
copyistechnically transferred. Further,if it would be different
rightholders tothesevarious copyright uses,practical
difficulties arise.The solution would then be a"bundling of
rights" so thattheuseofdigital transmission legally constitutes
a single relevant copyright use.

Linking and browsing

Should the provision of a hyperlink leading to a work or other
subject matter protected under copyright,either in generalor
under specific circumstances,besubject to the authorisation of
the rightholder?

NO

Answer: A hyperlink that leads to a work or other subjectmatter
should never be covered by the rightholder’sscope. When a
linkage does not constitute a communication to the public, but
only a reference to where the work is found, the rightholder
should not be able to prevailhow such reference may be made. It
should also not be an exception,because an exception assumes
that the action really is within the rightholder's scope.

Should the viewing of a web-pagewhere this impliesthetemporary
reproduction of a work or other subject matterprotected under
copyrighton the screen andin thecache memoryof the user’s
computer,either in general or under specific circumstances,be
subject to the authorisation of the rightholder?

NO

Answer:A temporary copyof the screen is already subject to
exceptions inSwedish legislation. This exception should not
ceaseunder any circumstances.

Download to own digital content

[In particular if you arean enduser/consumer:]Haveyou
facedrestrictionswhen trying to reselldigital files that
youhavepurchased(e.g.mp3 file,e-book)?

NO OPINION

[In particular if you area right holderor a service provider:]
What would betheconsequencesofproviding a legal framework
enabling the resale ofpreviouslypurchaseddigital content?
Please specify per market(type of content)concerned.

[Open question]

Answer: No opinion.

Registration of works andother subject matter – is it a good
idea?

Wouldthecreation ofa registration system at EU levelhelp in the
identification and licensing of works and other subject matter?

YES

What would bethe possible advantagesof such a system?

[Open question]

Answer:Provided that such a registration system would work in
practice, be fully updated regularly and especially prepared
promptly, it could have a significant practical importance when
tracingwho istheproperrightholder, ifthe rightholder's workis
managed by a collecting society orother (e.g. heirs) and any
necessarycontact information for licensing.

What would bethe possible disadvantagesof such a system?

[Open question]

Answer: Such a registration systemdemandsa great deal of the
registration system; whatshould be done in practice and by
whom. There is a risk that the required information, such as
contact information, becomesoutdated or incorrect already when
registration ismade. If immediate updating isnot done, it can
lead toa situation when accurate information,available
elsewhere, isconsidered secondary in importance.

Another disadvantagemay be that copyright law with a
registration system is formalized, which influences the
traditional European appearanceof copyright in general.With a
registration system copyrightarise onlywhen the work or other
subjectmatter has been registered.

Whatincentives forregistrationbyrightholderscouldbe envisaged?

[Open question]

Answer: The present situationprovidesno coherent and
comprehensive information of rightsholders and their created
works or other subjectmatter. In practice this means that in
many cases it is difficult to trace the properrightholders in
order to obtain permission for use. The consequence is that
these works or other subjectmatteris not being used or that the
usageoccurswithout permission.

How to improve theuse andinteroperability ofidentifiers

Whatshouldbethe role of theEUin promoting the adoption
of identifiers in the content sector, and in promoting the
development and interoperability of rights ownership and
permissions databases?

[Open question]

Answer: No opinion.

Term of protection– is it appropriate?

Arethe current terms ofcopyright protection still appropriate in
the digital environment?

NO

Answer:The long copyright terms of protection adopted in the
legislation complicates both the use of a variety of
interesting works and other subjectmatter ofwhich the public
should have access to. The digital revolution has already
created tremendous opportunities for such access, but copyright
law stands as an obstacle that does not follow thetrendand
demands in general.

Further practical problems arise in the search ofthe correct
rightholders for licensing, when the current 70 years after the
author's death year means that many generations after the
creator has occurred and thus a vast number of competent
rightholders. Our position is thatwhen the rights are managed
by the second orthird generationheirsof a deceased author
shouldthe public interest in having access to the
worksbereasonably balanced withthestrong position
oftheserightholders.

Limitations and exceptions in the Single Market

Are there problems arising from the fact that most limitations
and exceptions provided in the EUcopyrightdirectivesare
optionalfor the Member States?

YES

Answer:For users of works and other subject matter there
areuncertaintiesabout how the different Member States'
legislation looks like, which is important for e.g.the
cross-border availability. Furthermore, thisbecomesquite
oddwith a media formlike the Internet, that isin
itselftransnational.

Should some/all of the exceptions be made mandatory and, if so,
is there aneed for a higher level of harmonisation of such
exceptions?

YES

Answer:It would be desirable that all exceptions are made
mandatory and therebyharmonized. It has particular importance
for cultural heritage institutions'ability to satisfy the need
ofmaking available andpreservefor research purposes and for the
public part.

Should any newlimitations andexceptions be added toor removed
fromthe existing catalogue?Please explain by referring to
specific cases.

[Open question]

Answer:The possibilityto produce digital copies of works and
othersubject matter contained in the cultural heritages’
owncollections and make them available should covernot
onlyarchives and libraries, but all cultural heritage
institutions that are publicly funded, for examplemuseums.

Such an exceptionshould apply to all works or other
subjectmatter of which the author is unknown and thus may be
considered as so-called orphan works. It should alsobe noted
that with such an exception the digital availability couldmean
that information about the works suddenly emergesand the
rightholder maybe identified.

Furthermore, it is our view that such an exception to the
extentwould constitute a resonableexploitation ofSwedish
cultural heritage, which does not necessarily mean a
disadvantage for the rightholder. The interest of the work or
other subject matter (especially literature or text) will
probably andautomaticallybe limited geographically dueto
theSwedish language.

Independently from the questions above, is there a need to
provide for agreaterdegree of flexibility in the EU regulatory
framework for limitations and exceptions?

YES

Answer:To the extent that the digital and social development
requires such flexibility to meet different needs, it should
also be reflected in EU regulations.

If yes, what would be the best approach to provide for
flexibility? (e.g.interpretation by national courts and the
ECJ, periodic revisions of the directives, interpretations by
the Commission, built-in flexibility, e.g. in the form of a
fair-useor fair dealingprovision / open norm, etc.)?Please
explain indicating what would be the relative advantages and
disadvantages of such an approachas well asitspossible effects
on the functioning of the Internal Market.

[Open question]

Answer: The primary wayswould be to get access to a fair-use or
fair dealing provision/open normand,
whennecessary,interpretations of the national courts, the ECJ
and possibly even the Commission.

Does the territoriality of limitations and exceptions, in your
experience,constitute a problem?

YES

Answer:Each oftheterritorialitylimitationsorexceptions which
preventcross-border access to the cultural heritage of
theinstitutions' collections areproblematic. It also seems
contradictory to the EU itself, withterritorial restrictions
and exceptionsbetween countries within the EU.

In the event that limitationsand exceptionsestablished at
national level were to have cross-border effect, howshouldthe
question of “fair compensation” be addressed, whensuch
compensation is part of the exception? (e.g. who pays whom,
where?)

[Open question]

Answer: No opinion.

Access to content in libraries and archivesPreservationand
archiving

(a)[In particular if you arean institutional user:]Haveyou
experienced specific problems when trying to use an exception
to preserve and archive specific works or other subject matter
in your collection?

YES

Answer: Swedish law allowonly archive and certain types of
librariesto take part of the exception for preservation and
archiving. This means that a large part of the cultural
heritage institutionsis overlooked. It's aboveall themuseums
that manage and want to usetheirown collections notwithstanding
any copyright.

The meaningof this exceptioninSwedish legislation isthat digital
reproduction and making available for preservation,
researchpurposesandtothe public can take place only in analogue
form. Thecorresponding digital usagerequires anextendedlicense
agreement to be utilized,whichnormallymeans economic
compensation to therightholders.

In today's modern society and with the possibilities that
technology has created, andwith thecultural heritage
institutions limited finances, thecurrent
legislationisaseriousproblem in practice for cultural heritage
institutions to meet the demands of access from the public.

If there are problems, how would theybestbe solved?

[Open question]

Answer:All cultural heritage institutionsshould becovered by an
exception whichallowsthem to reproduce and makeavailable their
collectionsin both analogueand digital form as long as it is
done for a purpose that deals with preservation,
researchpurposes, and meeting the public interest.

If your view is that a legislative solution is needed, what
would be its main elements? Which activities of the beneficiary
institutions should be coveredand under which conditions?

[Open question]

Answer:A technology neutral usagewhich includeallcollections of
cultural heritage that exists at apublicly funded cultural
institution,even museums.

If your view is thatadifferent solutionisneeded, what would it
be?

[Open question]

Answer:Acorresponding utilization possibilityforthese
institutions will be constituted by a fair-use doctrineor good
practice / open standards.

Off-premises access to library collections

(a)[In particular if you are an institutional user:]Have you
experienced specific problems when trying to negotiate
agreements with rights holders that enable you to provide
remote access, including across borders,to your collections (or
parts thereof) for purposes of research and private study?

[Open question]

Answer: To the extent that rightholders perceivetheinstitution's
desired explotationas competing with its own activities
(newspapers, publishers, etc.),difficultiesoccurs when licenses
forthe usageisneeded.

Works that are considered "out of commerce", i.e. that areno
longer published or sold by the publishers, suffer a risk of
being “locked-in”because of copyrightrestrictions. If the
libraries are given an opportunity to exploitthem by a general
exception for its operations,such a lock-in effectceasesfor the
benefit of the public.

If there are problems, how would theybestbe solved?

[Open question]

Answer:By imposing a generalexception in law for cultural
heritage institutions in order to meet the specific
requirements of preservation, researchpurposesandthepublic
interest.

If your view is that a legislative solution is needed, what
would be its main elements? Which activities of the beneficiary
institutions should be coveredand under which conditions?

[Open question]

Answer:A technology neutral usagewhich includeallcollections of
cultural heritage that existat apublicly funded cultural
institution,even museums.

If your view is thatadifferent solutionisneeded, what would it
be?

[Open question]

Answer: A corresponding utilization possibility forthese
institutions will be constituted by a fair-use doctrineor good
practice / open standards.

E –lending

(a)[In particular if you are alibrary:]Have you experienced
specific problems when trying tonegotiate agreements to enable
the electronic lending(e-lending), including across borders,
ofbooks or other materials held in your collection?

YES

Answer: To the extent that rightholders perceivethe
institution's desired explotationas competing with its own
activities (newspapers, publishers, etc.),difficultiesoccurs
when licenses forthe usage isneeded.

If there are problems, how wouldtheybestbe solved?

[Open question]

Answer: By imposing a general exception in law for cultural
heritage institutions in order to meet the specific
requirements of preservation, researchpurposesandthepublic
interest.

The following two questions are relevant bothtothis point (n° 3)
and the previous one (n° 2).

[In particular if you are an institutional user:]What
differences do you see in the management of physical and online
collections, including providing access to your subscribers?
What problems have you encountered?

[Open question]

Answer:The Swedish legislation means that availabilityof online
collections can not be done without an extendedlicense
agreement to be utilized, except ifthe rightsareacquired
individually for parts of the online material.

[In particular if you are a right holder:]What difference do you
see betweenlibraries’traditional activities such as on-premises
consultation or public lending and activities such as
off-premises (online, at a distance) consultation and
e-lending? What problems have you encountered?

[Open question]

Answer: No opinion.

Mass digitisation

[In particular if you are an institutional user,engaging or
wanting to engage in mass digitisation projects,a
rightholder,acollective management organisation:]Woulditbe
necessaryin your country to enact legislationto ensure
thattheresults of the 2011 MoU (i.e. the agreements concluded
between libraries and collecting societies) havea cross-border
effect sothatout of commerce workscan be accessedacross the EU?

YES

Answer:Our position is that even citizens outside Sweden will be
able to take advantage of the value and importance of Swedish
cultural heritage. The ways to meet thisis best created through
exceptions for cultural heritage institutions in the manner
described above.

Would it be necessary to develop mechanisms, beyond those
already agreed for other typesof content (e.g.for audio- or
audio-visual collections, broadcasters’ archives)?

YES

Answer:In the same manner as described above, the introduction
of appropriate mechanisms to facilitate the making available of
audio and audiovisual collectionsfor preservation, research
purposes and for the public isdesirable.

Teaching

(a)[In particular if youare an enduser/consumeror an
institutional user:]Have you experienced specific problems when
trying to use works orother subject-matter for illustration for
teaching, including across borders?

NO OPINION

If there are problems, how wouldtheybestbe solved?

[Open question]

Answer: No opinion.

What mechanisms exist in the market place to facilitate the use
of content for illustration for teaching purposes?How
successful are they?

[Open question]

Answer: No opinion.

If your view is that a legislative solution is needed, what
would be its main elements? Which activities of the beneficiary
institutions should be coveredand underwhatconditions?

[Open question]

Answer: No opinion.

If your view is thatadifferent solutionisneeded, what would it
be?

[Open question]

Answer: No opinion.

Research

(a)[In particular if you arean enduser/consumeror an
institutional user:]Haveyou experienced specific problems when
trying to use works or other subject matter in thecontextof
research projects/activities, including across borders?

YES

Answer:In the same mannerthathas been described abovethere
isonlyan exceptionfor reproduction in analogueform for research
purposes, among others. All forms of digital availability for
research purposes requires that extended license
agreementsareused.

If there are problems, how wouldtheybestbe solved?

[Open question]

Answer: By imposing a general exception in law for cultural
heritage institutions in order to meet the specific
requirements that the researcherhas.

What mechanisms exist in the Member States to facilitate the use
of content for research purposes?How successful are they?

[Open question]

Answer:An exception is introduced concerning analogue
reproduction for e.g.research purposes. Furthermore, there is a
contractual license authorizing digital reproduction and making
available to archives and libraries. Thisextendedlicense
agreement has not yet been exercised. The reason is mainly the
concern about too costly right acquisitions.

Disabilities

(a)[Inparticular if you are a person with a disability or an
organisation representing persons with disabilities:]Have you
experienced problems with accessibility to content, including
across borders,arising from Member States’ implementation of
this exception?

(b)[Inparticular if you are an organisationproviding services
for persons with disabilities:]Have you experienced problems
when distributing/communicating works published in special
formats across the EU?

(c)[In particular if you are arightholder:]Have you
experiencedspecificproblems resulting fromthe application of
limitations or exceptions allowing for the
distribution/communication of works published in special
formats, including across borders?

NO OPINION

Ifthere are problems, what could be done to improve
accessibility?

[Open question]

Answer: No opinion.

What mechanisms exist in the market place to facilitate
accessibility to content? How successful are they?

[Open question]

Answer: No opinion.

Text and data mining

(a)[In particular if you are an enduser/consumeror an
institutional user:]Haveyou experiencedobstacles,linked to
copyright,when trying to usetext or data miningmethods,
including across borders?

YES

Answer:There exists a general problem of a copyright's effect on
text or data mining. Thisdissolves cultural heritage
institutions in practice by taking action that circumvents
copyright. It would be desirable even if this type of use would
be covered by a general exception for cultural heritage
institutions that are publicly funded.

If there are problems, how wouldtheybestbe solved?

[Open question]

Answer: By imposing a general exception in law for cultural
heritage institutionsthat are publicly fundedin order to meet
the specific requirements for preservation, research purposes
and for the public interest.

If your view is that a legislative solution is needed, what
would be its main elements? Which activities should be
coveredand underwhatconditions?

[Open question]

Answer: Atechnology neutral usagewhich includecopyingand storage
for allcollections of cultural heritage that exists at apublicly
funded cultural institution,even museums.

If your view is thatadifferent solutionisneeded, what would it
be?

[Open question]

Answer: A corresponding utilization possibility forthese
institutions will be constituted by a fair-use doctrineor good
practice / open standards.

Are there other issues, unrelated to copyright, that constitute
barriers to the use of text or data mining methods?

[Open question]

Answer: No opinion.

User-generated content

(a)[In particular if you are an enduser/consumer:]Have you
experienced problems when trying to use pre-existing works or
other subject matter to disseminate new content on the
Internet, including across borders?

(b)[In particular if you are aservice provider:]Have you
experienced problems when users publish/disseminatenew content
based on the pre-existing works or other subject-matter through
your service, including across borders?

(c)[In particular if you are a right holder:]Have you
experiencedproblems resulting from the waythe usersare using
pre-existing works or other subject-matter to disseminate new
content on the Internet, including across borders?

NO OPINION

(a)[In particular if you are an end user/consumer or aright
holder:]Have you experienced problems when trying to ensure
that the work you have created (on the basis of pre-existing
works) is properly identified for online use?Are proprietary
systems sufficient in this context?

(b)[In particular if you are a service provider:]Do you provide
possibilities for users that are publishing/disseminating the
works they have created (on the basis of pre-existing works)
through your service to properly identify these works for
online use?

NO OPINION

(a)[In particular if you are an enduser/consumeror aright
holder):]Have you experienced problems when trying to be
remunerated for the use of the work you have created (on the
basis of pre-existing works)?

(b)[In particular if you are a service provider:]Do you provide
remuneration schemes for users publishing/disseminating the
works they have created (on the basis of pre-existing works)
through your service?

NO OPINION

If there are problems, how would theybestbe solved?

[Open question]

Answer: No opinion.

If your view is that a legislative solution is needed, what
would be its main elements? Which activities should be
coveredand underwhatconditions?

[Open question]

Answer: No opinion.

If your view is thatadifferent solutionisneeded, what would it
be?

[Open question]

Answer: No opinion.

Private copying and reprography

In your view, is there a need to clarifyat the EU levelthe scope
and application of theprivate copyingand reprographyexceptions2

Art. 5.2(a) and 5.2(b) of Directive 2001/29/EC.

in the digital environment?

NO OPINION

Should digital copies made by end users for private purposes in
the context of a service that has been licensed by
rightholders, and where theharmto the rightholder is minimal,
be subject to private copying levies?3

This issue was also addressed in the recommendations of Mr
Antonio Vitorino resulting from the mediation on private
copying and reprography levies

 NO OPINION

How wouldchanges inlevieswith respect to the application
toonline services (e.g.services based oncloud computing
allowing, for instance,usersto have copieson different
devices)impactthe development and functioning ofnewbusiness
modelson the one hand and rightholders’ revenue on the other?

[Open question]

Answer: No opinion.

Would you see an added value in making levies visibleon the
invoices for products subject to levies?4

This issue was also addressed in the recommendations of Mr
Antonio Vitorino resulting from the mediation on private
copying and reprography levies.

NO OPINION

Have you experienced a situation whereacross-border transaction
resulted inundue levy payments, or duplicate payments of the
same levy, or other obstacles to the free movement of goods or
services?

NO OPINION

What percentage of products subject to a levy is sold to persons
other than natural persons for purposes clearly unrelated to
private copying? Do any of those transactions result in undue
payments? Please explain in detail the example you provide
(type of products, type of transaction, stakeholders, etc.).

[Open question]

Answer: No opinion.

Where such undue payments arise, what percentage of trade do
they affect? To what extent could a priori exemptionsand/orex
post reimbursement schemes existingin some Member Stateshelp to
remedy the situation?

[Open question]

Answer: No opinion.

Ifyou have identified specificproblemswith the
currentfunctioning of thelevy system, howwouldthese
problemsbestbesolved?

[Open question]

Answer: No opinion.

Fairremuneration of authors and performers

[In particular if you arean author/performer:] What is the best
mechanism (or combination of mechanisms) to ensurethatyou
receive an adequate remuneration for the exploitation of your
works and performances?

[Open question]

Answer: No opinion.

Istherea need to actat theEU level (for instance to prohibit
certain clauses in contracts)?

NO OPINION

Ifyou consider that the current rules are not effective, what
would you suggest to addresstheshortcomingsyou identify?

[Open question]

Answer: No opinion.

Respectforrights

Shouldthe civil enforcement system in the EU be rendered more
efficient for infringements of copyright committed with a
commercial purpose?

NO OPINION

In particular,isthe current legal framework clear enough to
allow forsufficient involvement of intermediaries (such as
Internet service providers, advertising brokers, payment
service providers, domain name registrars, etc.) in inhibiting
online copyright infringements with a commercial purpose? If
not, whatmeasureswould be useful to foster the cooperation of
intermediaries?

[Open question]

Answer: No opinion.

Does the current civil enforcement framework ensure that the
right balance is achieved between the right to have one’s
copyright respected and other rights such as the
protectionofprivate life and protection of personal data?

NO OPINION

AsingleEU CopyrightTitle

ShouldtheEU pursue the establishment of asingle
EUCopyrightTitle,as a means of establishing a consistent
framework for rights and exceptions to copyright across the EU,
as well as a single framework for enforcement?

YES

Should this be the next step in the development of copyright in
the EU? Does the current level of difference among the Member
State legislation mean that this is a longer term project?

[Open question]

Answer:The digital and social development of increasingly
transnational exchanges need uniform laws. A common EU
copyright law would contribute to transparency and clarity. It
is our opinion that it is therefore a project that should be
run.

Other issues

Are there any other important matters related to the EU legal
framework forcopyright?Pleaseexplainandindicatehow such matters
should be addressed.

[Open question]

Answer:The need for an early resolution ofthe so-called
orphansworks available inthe collections ofall cultural
heritage institutions. Currentlegislation prevents the usage
ofthese works. The solution we advocateis the introduction of a
general exception in a (common/cross-border) legislation for all
cultural heritage institutionsthat are publicly fundedin order
to meet the specific requirements of preservation,
researchpurposesand public interestin theinstitutions
collections. The alternative is a corresponding exploitation
allowed by afairuse doctrine orgood manners / open standards.

