


Public Consultation

on the review of the EU copyright rules

Contents

I.  Introduction  2

A.  Context of the consultation  2

B.  How to submit replies to this questionnaire  3

C.  Confidentiality  3

II.  Rights and the functioning of the Single Market  7

A.  Why is it not possible to access many online content
services from anywhere in Europe?  7

B.  Is there a need for more clarity as regards the scope of
what needs to be authorised (or not) in digital transmissions?
10

1.  The act of “making available”  10

2.  Two rights involved in asingle act of exploitation  11

3.  Linking and browsing  12

4.  Download to own digital content  13

C.  Registration of works and other subject matter – is it a
good idea?  14

D.  How to improve the use and interoperability of identifiers
15

E.  Term of protection – is it appropriate?  15

III.  Limitations and exceptions in the Single Market  16

A.  Access to content inlibraries and archives  19

1.  Preservation and archiving  19

2.  Off-premises access to library collections  20

3.  E – lending  21

4.  Mass digitisation  22

B.  Teaching  23

C.  Research  25

D.  Disabilities  25

E.  Text and data mining  27

F.  User-generated content  28

IV.  Private copying and reprography  31

V.  Fair remuneration of authors and performers  33

VI.  Respect for rights  34

VII.  Asingle EU Copyright Title  36

VIII.  Other issues  36

Introduction

Context of the consultation

Over the last two decades, digital technology and the Internet
have reshaped the ways in which content is created,
distributed, and accessed. New opportunities have materialised
for those that create and produce content (e.g. a film, a
novel, a song), for new and existing distribution platforms,
for institutions such as libraries, for activities such as
research and for citizens who now expect to be able to access
content – for information, education or entertainment purposes
– regardless of geographicalborders.

This new environment also presents challenges. One of them is
for the market to continue to adapt to new forms of
distribution and use. Another one is for the legislator to
ensure that the system of rights, limitations to rights and
enforcement remains appropriate and is adapted to the new
environment. This consultation focuses on the second of these
challenges: ensuring that the EU copyright regulatory framework
stays fit for purpose in the digital environment to support
creation and innovation,tap the full potential of the Single
Market, foster growth and investment in our economy and promote
cultural diversity.

In its "Communication on Content in the Digital Single Market"1

COM (2012)789 final, 18/12/2012.

the Commission set out two parallel tracks of action:on the one
hand, to complete its on-going effort to review and to
modernise the EU copyright legislative framework2

As announced in the Intellectual Property Strategy ' A single
market for Intellectual Property Rights: COM (2011)287 final,
24/05/2011.

3

"Based on market studies and impact assessment and legal
drafting work"as announced in the Communication (2012)789.

with a view to a decision in 2014 on whether to table
legislative reform proposals, andon the other, to facilitate
practical industry-led solutions through the stakeholder
dialogue "Licences for Europe" on issues on which rapid
progress was deemed necessary and possible.

The "Licences for Europe" process has been finalised now4

See the document “Licences for Europe – tem pledges to bring
more content
online”:http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/copyright/docs/licences-for-europe/131113_ten-pledges_en.pdf.

. The Commission welcomes the practical solutions stakeholders
have put forward in this context and will monitor their
progress. Pledges have been made by stakeholders in all four
Working Groups (cross border portability of services,
user-generated content, audiovisual and film heritage and text
and data mining). Taken together, the Commission expects these
pledges to be a further step in making the user environment
easier in many different situations. The Commission also takes
note of the fact that two groups – user-generated content and
text and data mining – did not reach consensus among
participating stakeholders on either the problems to be
addressed or on the results. The discussions and results of
"Licences for Europe" will be also taken into account in the
context of the review of the legislative framework.

As part of the review process, theCommission is now launching a
public consultation on issues identified in the Communication
on Content in the Digital Single Market, i.e.:"territoriality
in the Internal Market, harmonisation, limitations and
exceptions to copyright in the digital age; fragmentation of
the EU copyright market; and how to improve the effectiveness
and efficiency of enforcement while underpinning its legitimacy
in the wider context of copyright reform". As highlighted in the
October 2013 European CouncilConclusions5

EUCO169/13, 24/25 October 2013.

"Providing digital services and content across the single market
requires the establishment of a copyright regime for the digital
age. The Commission will therefore complete its on-going review
of the EU copyright framework in spring 2014. It is important
to modernise Europe's copyright regime and facilitate
licensing, while ensuring a high level protection of
intellectual property rights and taking into account cultural
diversity".

This consultation builds on previous consultations and public
hearings, in particular those on the "Green Paper on copyright
in the knowledge economy"6

COM(2008)
466/3,http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/copyright/copyright-infso/index_en.htm#maincontentSec2.

, the "Green Paper on the online distribution of audiovisual
works"7

COM(2011) 427
final,http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/consultations/2011/audiovisual_en.htm.

and "Content Online"8

http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/consultations/2009/content_online_en.htm.

. These consultations provided valuable feedback from
stakeholders on a number of questions, on issues as diverse as
the territoriality of copyright and possible ways to overcome
territoriality, exceptions related to the online
disseminationof knowledge, and rightholders’ remuneration,
particularly in the audiovisual sector. Views were expressed by
stakeholders representing all stages in the value chain,
including right holders, distributors, consumers, and
academics. The questions elicited widely diverging views on the
best way to proceed. The "Green Paper on Copyright in the
Knowledge Economy" was followed up by a Communication. The
replies to the "Green Paper on the online distribution of
audiovisual works" have fed into subsequent discussions on the
Collective Rights Management Directive and into the current
review process.

How to submit replies to this questionnaire

You are kindly asked to send your repliesby 5 February 2014in a
MS Word, PDF or OpenDocument format to the following
e-mailaddress of DG Internal Market and
Services:markt-copyright-consultation@ec.europa.eu. Please note
that replies sent after that date will not be taken into
account.

This consultation is addressed to different categories of
stakeholders. To the extent possible, the questions indicate
the category/ies of respondents most likely to be concerned by
them (annotation in brackets, before the actual question).
Respondents should nevertheless feel free to reply to any/all
of the questions. Also, please note that, apart from the
question concerning the identification of the respondent, none
of the questions is obligatory. Replies containing answers only
to part of the questions will be also accepted.

You are requested to provide your answers directly within this
consultation document. For the “Yes/No/No opinion” questions
please put the selected answer inboldandunderlineit so it is
easy for us to see your selection.

In your answers to the questions, you are invited to refer to
the situation in EU Member States.You are also invited in
particular to indicate, where relevant, what would be the
impact of options you put forward in terms of costs,
opportunities and revenues.

The public consultation is available in English. Responses may,
however, be sent in any of the24 official languages of the EU.

Confidentiality

The contributions received in this round of consultation as well
as a summary report presenting the responses in a statistical
and aggregated form will be published on the website of DG
MARKT.

Please note that all contributions received will be published
together with the identity of the contributor, unless the
contributor objects to the publication of their personal data
on the grounds that such publication would harm his or her
legitimate interests. In this case, the contribution will be
published in anonymous form upon the contributor's explicit
request. Otherwise the contribution will not be published nor
will its content be reflected in the summary report.

Pleaseread ourPrivacy statement.

Please identify yourself:

Name:

KOALICJA OTWARTEJ EDUKACJI (KOED)

In the interests of transparency, organisations (including, for
example,NGOs, trade associations and commercial enterprises)
are invited to provide the public with relevant information
about themselves by registering in the Interest Representative
Register and subscribing to its Code of Conduct.

If you are a Registered organisation, please indicate your
Register ID number below. Your contribution will then be
considered as representing the views of your organisation.

813401113189-16

If your organisation is not registered, you have the opportunity
toregister now. Responses from organisations not registered will
be published separately.

If you would like to submit your reply on an anonymous basis
please indicate it belowby underlining the following answer:

Yes, I would like to submit my reply on an anonymous basis

Type of respondent(Pleaseunderlinethe appropriate):

End user/consumer(e.g. internet user, reader, subscriber to
music or audiovisual service, researcher, student) OR
Representative of end users/consumers

for the purposes of this questionnaire normally referred to
in questions as"end users/consumers"

Institutional user(e.g. school, university, research centre,
library, archive) OR Representative of institutional users

for the purposes of this questionnaire normally referred to
in questions as"institutional users"

Author/Performer OR Representative of authors/performers

Publisher/Producer/Broadcaster OR Representative of
publishers/producers/broadcasters

the two above categoriesare,for the purposes of this
questionnaire, normally referred to in questions as"right
holders"

Intermediary/Distributor/Other service provider(e.g. online
music or audiovisual service, games platform, social media,
search engine, ICT industry)OR Representative of
intermediaries/distributors/other service providers

for the purposes of this questionnaire normally referred to
in questions as"service providers"

Collective Management Organisation

Public authority

Member State

Other(Please explain):

Koalicja Otwartej Edukacji jest porozumieniem organizacji
pozarządowych i instytucji działających w obszarze edukacji,
nauki i kultury. Celem jej działania jest budowanie, promocja i
aktywizm na rzecz otwartych zasobów edukacyjnych rozumianych
jako materiały, które są udostępnione w sposób otwarty i
gwarantujący ich odbiorcom wolność wykorzystywania i
odtwarzania utworu, wolność poznawania dzieła oraz
stosowaniazawartych w nim informacji, wolność redystrybucji i
wolność dystrybucji dzieł pochodnych.

Obecnie członkami KOED są: Fundacja Nowoczesna Polska,
Stowarzyszenie Wikimedia Polska, Stowarzyszenie Bibliotekarzy
Polskich, Interdyscyplinarne Centrum Modelowania Matematycznego
i Komputerowego, Fundacja Instytutu Rozwoju Regionalnego,
Stowarzyszenie EBIB, Centrum Edukacji Obywatelskiej, Fundacja
Nowe Media, Fundacja Orange, Centrum Cyfrowe Projekt: Polska,
Zachęta Narodowa Galeria Sztuki, Akademia Górniczo-Hutnicza im.
Stanisława Staszica w Krakowie, Fundacja Wolnego i Otwartego
Oprogramowania, Fundacja Liternet, Collegium Artium,
Stowarzyszenie OpenStreetMap Polska, Fundacja Kolonia Artystów,

Fundacja Laboratorium Badań i Działań Społecznych "SocLab",
Instytut Kultury Miejskiej, Fundacja Pomocy Matematykom i
Informatykom NiepełnosprawnychRuchowo, Biblioteka Uniwersytecka
w Toruniu, Fundacja Naukowa Przyjaciół

Instytutu Historycznego UW KLIO, Instytut Kultury Polskiej na
Wydziale

Polonistyki UW, Ruch społeczny Obywatele Nauki, Stowarzyszenie

Bibliosfera.org.

Biuro Koalicji prowadzi Fundacja Nowoczesna Polska (Warszawa).

Rights and the functioning of the Single Market

Why is it not possible to access many online content services
from anywhere in Europe?[The territorial scope of the rights
involved in digital transmissions and the segmentation of the
market through licensing agreements]

Holders of copyright and related rights – e.g. writers, singers,
musicians - do not enjoy a single protection in the EU. Instead,
they are protected on the basis of a bundle of national rights
in each Member State. Those rights have been largely harmonised
by the existing EU Directives. However, differences remain and
the geographical scope of the rights is limited to the
territory of the Member State granting them. Copyright is thus
territorial in the sense that rights are acquired and enforced
on a country-by-country basis under national law9

This principle has been confirmed by the Court of justice on
several occasions.

.

The dissemination of copyright-protected contenton the Internet
– e.g. by a music streaming service, or by an online e-book
seller – therefore requires, in principle, an authorisation for
each national territory in which the content is communicated to
the public. Rightholders are, of course, in a position to grant
a multi-territorial or pan-European licence, such that content
services can be provided in several Member States and across
borders. A number of steps have been taken at EU level to
facilitate multi-territorial licences: the proposal for a
Directive on Collective Rights Management10

Proposal for a Directive of the European Parliament and of the
Council of 11 July 2012 on collective management of copyright
and related rights and multi-territorial licensing of rights in
musical works for online uses in the internal market, COM(2012)
372 final.

should significantly facilitate the delivery of
multi-territorial licences in musical works for online
services11

Collective Management Organisations play a significant role in
the management of online rights for musical works in contrast
to the situation where online rights are licensed directly by
right holders such as film or record producers or by newspaper
or book publishers.

; the structured stakeholder dialogue “Licences for Europe”12

You can find more information on the following website:
http://ec.europa.eu/licences-for-europe-dialogue/.

and market-led developments such as the on-going work in the
Linked Content Coalition13

You can find more information on the following
website:http://www.linkedcontentcoalition.org/.

.

"Licences for Europe" addressed in particular the specific issue
of cross-border portability, i.e. the ability of consumers
having subscribed to online services in their Member State to
keep accessing them when travelling temporarily to other Member
States. As a result, representatives of the audio-visual sector
issued a joint statement affirming their commitment tocontinue
working towards the further development of cross-border
portability14

See the document “Licences for Europe – tem pledges to bring
more content
online”:http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/copyright/docs/licences-for-europe/131113_ten-pledges_en.pdf.

.

Despite progress, there are continued problems with the
cross-border provision of, and access to, services. These
problems are most obvious to consumers wanting to access
services that are made available in Member States other than
the one in which they live. Not all online services are
available in all Member States and consumers face problems when
trying to access such services acrossborders. In some instances,
even if the “same” service is available in all Member States,
consumers cannot access the service across borders (they can
only access their “national” service, and if they try to access
the "same" service in another Member State they are redirected
to the one designated for their country of residence).

This situation may in part stem from the territoriality of
rights and difficulties associated with the clearing of rights
in different territories. Contractual clauses in licensing
agreements between right holders and distributors and/or
between distributors and end users may also be at the origin of
some of the problems (denial of access, redirection).

The main issue at stake here is, therefore, whether further
measures (legislative or non-legislative, including market-led
solutions) need to be taken at EU level in the medium term15

For possible long term measures such as the establishment of a
European Copyright Code (establishing a single title) see
section VII of this consultation document.

to increase the cross-border availability of content services in
the Single Market, while ensuring an adequate level of
protection for right holders.

[In particular if you are an end user/consumer:]Have you faced
problems when trying to access online services in an EU Member
State other than the one in which you live?

 YES - Please provide examples indicating the Member State,
the sector and the type of content concerned (e.g. premium
content suchas certain films and TV series, audio-visual
content in general, music, e-books, magazines, journals and
newspapers, games, applications and other software)

Wielu badaczy skarży się na ograniczenia w dostępie do artykułów
naukowych, przypisanego do IP ichprywatnego komputera lub IP
komputera uczelnianego. Przy wyjeździe za granicę dostęp do
tych treści jest niemożliwy.

 NO

 NO OPINION

[In particular if you are a service provider:]Have you faced
problems when seeking to provide online services across borders
in the EU?

 YES - Please explain whether such problems, in your
experience, are related to copyright or to other issues (e.g.
business decisions relating to the cost of providing services
across borders, compliance with other laws such as consumer
protection)? Please provide examples indicating the Member
State, the sector and the type of content concerned (e.g.
premium content such as certain films and TV series,
audio-visual content in general, music, e-books, magazines,
journals and newspapers, games, applications and other
software).

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO

 NO OPINION

[In particular if you are a right holder or a collective
management organisation:]How often are you asked to grant
multi-territorial licences? Please indicate, if possible, the
number of requests per year and provide examples indicating the
Member State, the sector and the type of content concerned.

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

If you have identified problems in the answers to any of the
questions above – what would be the best way to tackle them?

Terytorialny charakter praw wyłącznych na dobrach
niematerialnych nie ma uzasadnienia w czasach globalnej
komunikacji przez media.

Problem terytorialności szczególnie dotyczy zasad wygasania
autorskich praw majątkowych w różnych krajach oraz ustalania,
które rodzaje materiałów są całkowicie wyłączone z ochrony
prawno-autorskiej.Wprawdzie w ramach UE terminy wygasania są
harmonizowane, to jednak liczy się je od różnych zdarzeń w
stosunku do różnych utworów i nie zawsze utwory tego samego
rodzaju podlegają tym samym zasadom we wszystkich państwach
członkowskich. Dla przykładu, we Francji lata wojny nie liczą
się do czasu trwania praw wyłącznych, a w Polsce sprawa praw do
dzieł Janusza Korczaka pokazała, że nawet tak prosta wydawałoby
się kwestia jak bezsporna data śmierci twórcy może być
skomplikowana przez prawo.

Z punktu widzeniaKoalicji Otwartej Edukacji i jej celów,
kluczowym problemem jest również niepełna harmonizacja zezwoleń
korzystania z utworów dla celów edukacyjnych. Odpowiednie
przepis Dyrektywy 2001/29/WE w sprawie harmonizacji niektórych
aspektów praw autorskich i pokrewnych w społeczeństwie
informacyjnym zostały różnie implementowane w państwach
członkowskich, co skutkuje wysokim stopniem niepewności
użytkowników co do zakresu działań edukacyjnych dozwolonych
przez prawo. Pragniemy przy tym podkreślić, że ujednolicenie
tych przepisów powinno zmierzać do pełnej implementacji, w
każdym państwie członkowskim, zakresu wyjątków i ograniczeń
przewidzianych przez Dyrektywę oraz nie może prowadzić do
sytuacji, w której efektem harmonizacji jest ograniczenie praw
jakimi użytkownicy edukacyjni cieszą się w chwili obecnej.

Pełna harmonizacja i ujednolicenie przepisów prawa autorskiego w
UE pozwoli na dostosowanie przepisów do współczesnych realiów
globalnej internetowej komunikacji.

Ważnym wątkiem, który należy podjąć w dyskusjio ujednoliceniu
przepisów prawa autorskiego w UE jest dostępność i swoboda
wykorzystywania zasobów internetowych w procesie nauczania i
uczenia się. Liczne wyjątki i brak czytelnych reguł sprawiają,
że edukacyjny i poznawczy potencjał Internetu nie są w pełni
wykorzystywane.

Warto podkreślić, że ujednolicenie przepisów na terytorium UE
byłoby jedynie częściowym rozwiązaniem globalnego problemu
niekompatybilności zasad prawa autorskiego. Nadal istniałby
problem niezgodności prawa UE z prawem na przykładStanów
Zjednoczonych, Federacji Rosyjskiej czy krajów azjatyckich -
będących kluczowymi partnerami gospodarczymi Unii
Europejskiej. W dobie Internetu i globalnej wymiany informacji
ponad granicami państw i systemów prawnych integracja przepisów
p.a. w granicach UE jest konieczna, ale na pewno
niewystarczająca. Dlatego władze UE powinny wspierać takie
rozwiązania prawne, które pomimo tak wielkiego zróżnicowania
przepisów i filozofii prawa autorskiego pozwalają na globalną
dystrybucję i wykorzystanie dóbr kultury. Jednym rozwiązaniem
jest wsparcie dla rozwoju treści udostępnianych na wolnych
licencjach, ale trzeba zauważyć że to rozwiązanie tylko w
ograniczonym zakresie wpłynie na pewność prawną korzystania z
utworów.

[In particular if you are a right holder or a collective
management organisation:]Are there reasons why, even in cases
where you hold all the necessary rights for all the territories
in question, you would still find it necessary or justified to
impose territorial restrictions on a service provider (in
order, for instance, to ensure that access to certain content
is not possible in certain European countries)?

 YES – Please explain by giving examples

NO

Instytucje i organizacje działające w ramach KOED nie narzucają
żadnych terytorialnych ograniczeń w dostępności i
wykorzystaniu tworzonych przez siebie zasobów, starając się
rozpowszechniać je na wolnych licencjach gwarantujących
powszechnie prawo swobodnego wykorzystania licencjonowanych
utworów.

 NO OPINION

[In particular if you are e.g.a broadcaster or a service
provider:]Are there reasons why, even in cases where you have
acquired all the necessary rights for all the territories in
question, you would still find it necessary or justified to
impose territorial restrictions on the service recipient (in
order for instance, to redirect the consumer to a different
website than the one he is trying to access)?

 YES – Please explain by giving examples

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO

 NOOPINION

Do you think that further measures (legislative or
non-legislative, including market-led solutions) are needed at
EU level to increase the cross-border availability of content
services in the Single Market, while ensuring an adequate level
of protection for right holders?

YES – Please explain

Instytucje tworząc zasoby edukacyjne czy udostępniając online
zbiory dziedzictwa z domeny publicznej nie mają pewności, że
wszędzie każdy ma takie same swobody w ich wykorzystaniu. UE
powinna zapewnić równedla mieszkańców wszystkich krajów
członkowskich możliwości wykorzystania zasobów internetowych
tworzonych i udostępnianych przez publiczne instytucje
edukacyjne i instytucje dziedzictwa. Utrzymywanie uzależnionych
od kraju czy narodowości użytkownika barier w dostępie do
zasobów edukacji i kultury w dobie Internetu jest bezzasadne.

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO OPINION

Is there a need for more clarity as regards the scope of what
needs to be authorised (or not) in digital transmissions?[The
definition of the rights involved in digital transmissions]

The EU framework for the protection of copyright and related
rights in the digital environment is largely established by
Directive 2001/29/EC16

Directive 2001/29/EC of the European Parliament and of the
Council of 22 May 2001 on the harmonisation of certain aspects
of copyright and related rights in the information society.

on the harmonisation of certain aspects of copyright and related
rights in the information society. OtherEU directives in this
field that are relevant in the online environment are those
relating to the protection of software17

Directive 2009/24/EC of the European Parliament and ofthe
Council of 23 April 2009 on the legal protection of computer
programs.

and databases18

Directive 96/9/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council
of 11 March 1996 on the legal protection of databases.

.

Directive 2001/29/ECharmonises the rightsof authors and
neighbouring rightholders19

Film and record producers, performers and broadcasters are
holders of so-called “neighbouring rights” in, respectively,
their films, records, performances and broadcast. Authors’
content protected by copyright isreferred to as a “work” or
“works”, while content protected by neighbouring rights is
referred to as “other subject matter”.

which are essential for the transmission of digital copies of
works (e.g. an e-book) and other protected subject matter (e.g.
a record in a MP3 format) over the internet or similar digital
networks.

The most relevant rights for digital transmissions are the
reproduction right, i.e. the right to authorise or prohibit the
making of copies20

The right to “authorise or prohibit director indirect, temporary
or permanent reproduction by any means and in any form, in whole
or in part” (see Art. 2 of Directive 2001/29/EC) although
temporary acts of reproduction of a transient or incidental
nature are, under certain conditions, excluded (see art. 5(1)
of Directive 2001/29/EC).

, (notably relevant at the start of the transmission – e.g. the
uploading of a digital copy of a work to a server in view of
making it available – and at the users’ end – e.g. when a user
downloads a digital copy of awork) and the communication to the
public/making available right, i.e. the rights to authorise or
prohibit the dissemination of the works in digital networks21

The right to authorise or prohibit any communication to the
public by wire or wireless means and to authorise or prohibit
the making available to the public “on demand” (see Art. 3 of
Directive 2001/29/EC).

. These rights are intrinsically linked in digital transmissions
and both need to be cleared.

The act of “making available”

Directive 2001/29/EC specifies neitherwhatis covered by the
making available right (e.g. the upload, the accessibility by
the public, the actual reception by the public) norwherethe act
of “making available” takes place. This does not raise questions
if the act is limited to a single territory. Questions arise
however when the transmission covers several territories and
rights need to be cleared (does the act of "making available"
happen in the country of the upload only? in each of the
countries where the content is potentially accessible? in each
of the countries where the content is effectively accessed?).
The most recent case law of the Court of Justice of the
European Union (CJEU) suggests that a relevant criterion is the
“targeting” of a certain Member State's public22

See in particular Case C-173/11 (Football Dataco vs Sportradar)
and Case C-5/11 (Donner) for copyright and related rights, and
Case C-324/09 (L’Oréal vs eBay) for trademarks. With regard to
jurisdiction see also joined Cases C-585/08 and C-144/09
(Pammer and Hotel Alpenhof) and pending CaseC-441/13 (Pez
Hejduk); see however, adopting a different approach, Case
C-170/12 (Pinckney vs KDG Mediatech).

. According to this approach the copyright-relevant act(which
has to be licensed) occurs at least in thosecountries which are
“targeted” by the online service provider. A service provider
“targets” a group of customers residing in a specific country
when it directs its activity to that group, e.g. via
advertisement, promotions, a language or a currency
specifically targeted at that group.

Is the scope of the “making available” right in cross-border
situations – i.e. when content is disseminated across borders –
sufficiently clear?

 YES

 NO – Please explain how this could be clarified and what
type of clarification would be required (e.g. as in
"targeting"approach explained above, as in "country of origin"
approach23

The objective of implementing a “country of origin” approach is
to localise the copyright relevant act that must be licenced in
a single Member State (the "country of origin", which could
befor example the Member State in which the content is uploaded
or where the service provider is established), regardless of in
how many Member States the work can be accessed or received.
Such an approach has already been introduced at EU level with
regardto broadcasting by satellite (see Directive 93/83/EEC on
the coordination of certain rules concerning copyright and
rights related to copyright applicable to satellite
broadcasting and cable retransmission).

)

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO OPINION

[In particular if you are a right holder:]Could a clarification
of the territorial scope of the “making available” right have
an effect on the recognition of your rights (e.g. whether you
are considered to be anauthor or not, whether you are
considered to have transferred your rights or not), on your
remuneration, or on the enforcement of rights (including the
availability of injunctive relief24

Injunctive relief is a temporary or permanent remedy allowing
theright holder to stop or prevent an infringement of his/her
right.

)?

 YES – Please explain how such potential effects could be
addressed

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO

 NO OPINION

Two rights involved in asingle act of exploitation

Each act of transmission in digital networks entails (in the
current state of technology and law) several reproductions.
This means that there are two rights that apply to digital
transmissions: the reproduction right and the making available
right. This may complicate the licensing of works for online
use notably when the two rights are held by different
persons/entities.

[In particular if you a service provider or a right holder:]Does
the application of two rights to a singleact of economic
exploitation in the online environment (e.g. a download) create
problems for you?

 YES – Please explain what type of measures would be needed
in order to address such problems (e.g. facilitation of joint
licences when the rights are in different hands, legislation to
achieve the "bundling of rights")

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO

 NO OPINION

Linking and browsing

Hyperlinks are references to data that lead a user from one
location in the Internet to another. They are indispensable for
the functioning of the Internet as a network. Several cases are
pending before the CJEU25

Cases C-466/12 (Svensson), C-348/13(Bestwater International) and
C-279/13 (C More entertainment).

in which the question has been raised whether the provision of
a clickable link constitutes an act of communication to the
public/making available to the public subject to the
authorisation ofthe rightholder.

A user browsing the internet (e.g. viewing a web-page) regularly
creates temporary copies of works and other subject-matter
protected under copyright on the screen and in the 'cache'
memory of his computer. A question has been referred to the
CJEU26

Case C-360/13 (Public Relations Consultants Association Ltd).
See
alsohttp://www.supremecourt.gov.uk/decided-cases/docs/UKSC_2011_0202_PressSummary.pdf.

as to whether such copies are always covered by the mandatory
exception for temporary acts of reproduction provided for in
Article 5(1) of Directive 2001/29/EC.

Should the provision of a hyperlink leading to a work or other
subject matter protected under copyright, either in general or
under specific circumstances, be subject to the authorisation
of the rightholder?

 YES – Please explain whether you consider this to be the
case in general, or under specific circumstances, and why

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO – Please explain whether you consider this to be the case
in general, or under specific circumstances, and why (e.g.
because it does not amount to an act of communication to the
public –or to a new public, or because it should be covered by
a copyright exception)

Jakiekolwiek ograniczania prawne w możliwości swobodnego
linkowania są wystąpieniem przeciwko podstawom funkcjonowania
internetu jako przestrzeni komunikacji i dystrybucji treści.
World Wide Web to przecież hipertekstowa sieć wzajemnie
odnoszących się do siebie dokumentów. Linkowanie oraz klikanie
w linki jest czymś naturalnym. Nakładanie na użytkowników
internetu obowiązku sprawdzania statusu prawnoautorskiego
obiektów, do których tworzą odnośniki to zły kierunek ewolucji
przepisów prawa autorskiego z przynajmniej kilku powodów:

a) nie można zakładać, że każdy użytkownik internetu posiadać
będzie odpowiednią wiedzę czy świadomość prawną w zakresie
prawa autorskiego i umiał będziepoprawnie rozpoznać status
prawnoautorski linkowanej treści;

b) skoro tak, omawiany przepis będzie martwym prawem, trudno
bowiem wyobrazić sobie narzędzia pozwalające na skuteczne
egzekwowanie nie-tworzenia odnośników w sieci WWW; już dziś
powszechnie wykorzystywane są narzędzia pozwalające skracać
skomplikowane adresy URL przez maskowanie oryginalnej
rozbudowanej wersji do postaci kilkuznakowego ciągu - w tym
przypadku między osobą linkującą a linkowanym obiektem pojawia
się pośrednik, którego istnienie jeszcze bardziej
komplikowałoby proces rozpoznawania odnośników nielegalnie
linkujących do chronionych treści (URL shortening);

c) uznanie za zasadne uzależnienia legalności linkowania od
statusu prawnoautorskiego linkowanego utworu i zgody
uprawnionychuderzałoby w działalność naukową, opartą przecież o
rzetelne wymienianie źródeł informacji;

d) treści cyfrowe - jak pokazuje Lev Manovich - nie są
jednorodne; jedna pojedyncza strona WWW zawierać może wiele
elementów o różnym statusie prawnoautorskim (kodHTML, CSS,
grafikę, skrypty i widżety udostępniane przez serwisy takie jak
Facebook). Status prawnoautorski strony WWW jako utworu może być
zatem bardzo skomplikowany, a jego proste i szybkie rozpoznanie
niemożliwe, podobnie jak w przypadku innych złożonych utworów
(animacji, filmów, muzyki itp.).

e) zwracamy uwagę, że akt 'linkowania' jest bardzo trudny do
zdefiniowania: stworzenie aktywnego odnośnika możliwe jest za
pomocą kodu HTML (tag a), kodów QR, tzw. hot area na obrazie
itd, odnośnik nie musi też wprost wskazywać na końcowy obiekt
(w przypadku tzw. URL shortening); 

e) omawiana regulacja zakładałaby błędnie, że linkowanie można
utożsamiać z publikowaniem. Na tej samej zasadzie podawanie
tytułu dzieła drukowanego nie może być uznawane za jego
publikację;

f) podkreślamy, że wprowadzenie takiej regulacji byłoby
niepokojącą i daleko idącą ingerencją w prawo wolności słowa
oraz swobody badań i publikowania naukowego.

Rekomendujemy jednoznaczne odrzucenie omawianej propozycji zmian
w prawie autorskim. Z  punktu widzenia instytucji edukacji i
nauki pewność dotycząca prawa do  linkowania (czyli de facto
zamieszczenia adresu bibliograficznego  rozpowszechnionej
treści) jest absolutnie niezbędna w procesie komunikacji
naukowej i edukacyjnej. Sytuacja w której podanie źródła
informacji może być obarczone ryzykiem prawnym jest
niedopuszczalna względu na standardy transparentności i 
dokumentacji źródeł w procesie naukowym. Nawet sam fakt, że
poddaje się w  wątpliwość i debatuje legalność podania przypisu
bibliograficznego w formie odesłania do zasobu jest z punktu
widzenia Koalicji zagrożeniem, gdyż może już teraz rodzić
negatywne skutki w sposobie działalności i komunikacji
środowisk naukowych.

 NO OPINION

Should the viewing of a web-page where this implies the
temporary reproduction of a work or other subject matter
protected under copyright on the screen and in the cache memory
of the user’s computer, either in general or under specific
circumstances, be subject to the authorisation of the
rightholder?

 YES– Please explain whether you consider this to be the case
in general, or under specific circumstances, and why

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO – Please explain whether you consider this to be the case
ingeneral, or under specific circumstances, and why (e.g.
because it is or should be covered by a copyright exception)

Zwielokrotnianie utworów jest procesem niezbędnym do
wyświetlania treści stron WWW. Proces ten regulowany jest
zasadą dozwolonego użytku prywatnego i dozwolony na mocy na
mocy art. 5.1 Dyrektywy 2001/29. Uzależnienie możliwości
skopiowania (de facto wyświetlenia) zasobu strony WWW od zgody
uprawnionego z tytułu praw autorskich uderzałoby nie tylko w
prawa użytkownika wynikające z dozwolonegoużytku, ale także w
efektywność jednego z podstawowych mechanizmów działania sieci
World Wide Web.

 NO OPINION

Download to own digital content

Digital content is increasingly being bought via digital
transmission (e.g. download to own). Questions ariseas to the
possibility for users to dispose of the files they buy in this
manner (e.g. by selling them or by giving them as a gift). The
principle of EU exhaustion of the distribution right applies in
the case of the distribution of physical copies (e.g. when a
tangible article such as a CD or a book, etc. is sold, the
right holder cannot prevent the further distribution of that
tangible article)27

See also recital 28 of Directive 2001/29/EC.

. The issue that arises here is whether this principle can also
beapplied in the case of an act of transmission equivalent in
its effect to distribution (i.e. where the buyer acquires the
property of the copy)28

In Case C-128/11 (Oracle vs. UsedSoft) the CJEU ruled that an
author cannot oppose the resale of a second-hand licence that
allows downloading his computer program from his website and
using it for an unlimited period of time. The exclusive right
of distribution of a copy of a computer program covered by such
a licence is exhausted on its first sale. While it isthus
admitted that the distribution right may be subject to
exhaustion in case of computer programs offered for download
with the right holder’s consent, the Court was careful to
emphasise that it reached this decision based on the Computer
Programs Directive. It was stressed that this exhaustion rule
constituted alex specialisin relation to the Information
Society Directive (UsedSoft, par. 51, 56).

. This raises difficult questions, notably relating to the
practical application of such an approach(how to avoid
re-sellers keeping and using a copy of a work after they have
“re-sold” it – this is often referred to as the “forward and
delete” question) as well as to the economic implications of
the creation of a second-hand market of copies of
perfectquality that never deteriorate (in contrast to the
second-hand market for physical goods).

[In particular if you are an end user/consumer:]Have you faced
restrictions when trying to resell digital files that you have
purchased (e.g. mp3 file, e-book)?

YES – Please explain by giving examples

Należy zbadać skuteczność prawną zakazów odsprzedaży utworów w
postaci cyfrowej zapisanych w umowach między dostarczycielem
treści a odbiorcą wobec istnienia np. przepisów dozwolonego
użytku prywatnego (jak to jest wpolskim systemie prawa
autorskiego). Techniczne ograniczenia blokujące odsprzedaż
plików (DRM) również należy skonfrontować z tymi przepisami
oraz zalegalizować możliwość obchodzenia zabezpieczeń przez
użytkownika, chcącego realizować swoje uprawnienia wynikające
z dozwolonego użytku.

 NO

 NO OPINION

[In particular if you are a right holder or a service provider:]
What would be the consequences of providing a legal framework
enabling the resale of previously purchased digital content?
Please specify permarket (type of content) concerned.

W chwili obecnej, zasada wyczerpania prawa odnosi się także do
cyfrowych kopii utworów. W  2012 roku Trybunał Sprawiedliwości
Unii  Europejskiej przyznał rację niemieckiej firmie UsedSoft,
że legalnie nabyty program komputerowy można odsprzedać, nawet
jeżeli nabycie nastąpiło poprzez pobranie z internetu i nawet
jeżeli licencja tego zakazuje. Można mieć oczywiście
wątpliwości, czy wyrok dotyczący programów komputerowych
można bezpośrednio odnosić do innego rodzaju przedmiotów praw
autorskich, jednak o wiele bardziej istotne są następujące
kwestie. Po pierwsze, sąd nie zakazał producentom stosowania
zabezpieczeń technicznych niweczących skutek przekazania
programów (utworów) komuś innemu. Po drugie, odsprzedaż
zakłada, że odsprzedający pozbywa się utworu. Ma to oczywiście
sens w przypadku odsprzedaży fizycznych nośników, ale nie ma
większego sensu w Internecie, gdzie każdy może mieć swoją
własną kopię. Nie uważamy zatem za zasadne dążenie do
wprowadzenia ustawowego wyczerpania prawa do kopii cyfrowych,
gdyż najprawdopodobniej towarzyszyć temu będą próby "popsucia"
Internetu (technologii informacyjno-komunikacyjnych) poprzez
wprowadzenie technicznych środków pilnujących, aby odsprzedana
kopia "znikała" na komputerze odsprzedającego. Stanowi to
zagrożenie dla prywatności nie wspominając już o suboptymalnym
wykorzystaniem technologii. Uważamy po prostu, że prawo nie
powinno akceptować zachowań producentów uniemożliwiających
rozpowszechnianie raz sprzedanych dóbr kultury.

Registration of works and other subject matter – is it a good
idea?

Registration is not often discussed in copyright in the EU as
the existing international treaties in the area prohibit
formalities as a condition for the protection and exercise of
rights.However, this prohibition is not absolute29

For example, it does not affect “domestic” works – i.e. works
originating in the country imposing the formalities as opposed
to works originating in another country.

. Moreover a system of registration does not need to be made
compulsory or constitute a precondition for the protection and
exercise of rights. With a longer term of protection and with
the increased opportunities that digital technology provides
for the use of content (including older works and worksthat
otherwise would not have been disseminated), the advantages and
disadvantages of a system of registration are increasingly being
considered30

On the basis of Article 3.6 of the Directive 2012/28/EU of the
European Parliament and of the Council of 25October 2012 on
certain permitted uses of orphan works, a publicly accessible
online database is currently being set up by the Office for
Harmonisation of the Internal Market (OHIM) for the
registration of orphan works.

.

Would the creation of a registration system at EU level help in
the identification and licensing of works and other subject
matter?

 YES

 NO

 NO OPINION

What would be the possible advantages of such a system?

Zgodnie z art. 5 ust. 2 Konwencji berneńskiej o ochronie
dziełliterackich i artystycznych, korzystanie w danym państwie
– stronie tej Konwencji z praw autorskich przysługujących
twórcy utworu powstałego w innym państwie nie wymaga
spełnienia żadnych formalności. W praktyce w wielu państwach
zasadą tą objęto także twórców krajowych.

W związku z rozwojem technologii cyfrowych, ułatwiających
eksploatację utworów, coraz częściej zwraca się uwagę na
korzyści płynące z systemów ich rejestracji – niekoniecznie
obligatoryjnych. Przykładem takiego systemu jest powstająca
obecnie baza danych utworów osieroconych, do której utworzenia
zobowiązany został Urząd Harmonizacji Rynku Wewnętrznego
(OHIM). Istnieje też wiele baz danych stworzonych przez
producentów, wydawców, organizacje zbiorowego zarządzania czy
biblioteki.

Dzięki systemowi rejestracji instytucje dziedzictwa mogłyby w
potencjalnie efektywniejszy sposób rozpoznawać status
prawnoautorski swoich zbiorów, co byłoby ważnym wsparciem dla
procesu digitalizacji dziedzictwa w Europie także w
przyszłości. Pozostają oczywiście pytania o koszty
funkcjonowania tego systemu, dostępność gromadzonych przez
niego danych (które powinny być maksymalnie otwarte do
ponownego wykorzystania przez inne podmioty) oraz rozwiązanie
problemu możliwego zawłaszczania utworów (szczególnie tych
budowanych w oparciu o treści czy programy dostępne dziś na
wolnych licencjach).

What would be the possible disadvantages of such a system?

W tej sprawie Koalicja nie wypracowała jednolitego stanowiska.
Część jej członków stoi na stanowisku, że odpowiednie wdrożenie
systemu rejestracji utworów w celu objęcia ich ochroną
przysłużyć by się mogło nie tylko twórcom, ale też
użytkownikom, którzy w prosty sposób zdobywać mogliby
informację o podmiotach uprawnionych w zakresie autorskich praw
majątkowych do poszczególnych utworów. W perspektywie
pozwoliłoby to także na ograniczenie problemu utworów
osieroconych, które stanowią poważną barierę w rozwoju
bibliotek i archiwów cyfrowych. Należy jednak zastanowić się,
czy wymóg rejestracji w efekcie poszerzałby realną domenę
publiczną. Dużo zależy od tego jak konkretnie funkcjonowałby
system rejestracji. Jeżeli system byłby nieszczelny (jak
niektóre systemy patentowe, w których badanie patentowe
przeprowadzane jest bardzo pobieżnie lub według bardzo
liberalnych kryteriów) iumożliwiał rejestrację cudzych utworów
lub zawłaszczanie utworów już przeszłych do domeny publicznej,
to efekt powstania takiego systemu będzie skutkował
zmniejszeniem, a nie zwiększeniem pewności prawnej
użytkowników.

Zwracamy też uwagę, że w konsultacjach europejskich sieć
Communia rekomenduje uzupełnienie systemu rejestracji utworów o
informacje o utworach z domeny publicznej i utworach
osieroconych. Realizacja takiej koncepcji wydaje się niemożliwa
z powodu skali wielkości zasobów domeny publicznej. Warto
również zadać pytanie o końcową efektywność i koszty
funkcjonowania takiego systemu oraz prawa społeczeństwa do
wolnego wykorzystywania danych gromadzonych w ramach
rejestracji. Podobne wątpliwości budzi budowany obecnie system
informacji o utworach osieroconych ARROW.

Część instytucji współpracujących w ramach KOED zdecydowanie
sprzeciwia się wdrożeniu projektu systemu rejestracji utworów.
W istotny sposób ograniczałby on efektywność wolnych licencji,
będących dziś dobrym narzędziem rozpowszechnianiachronionych
utworów i legalizujących ich wykorzystywanie, modyfikowanie i
dystrybucje zmodyfikowanych wersji. Po wprowadzeniu
obowiązkowej rejestracji jako warunku udzielania ochrony
prawnej blokowana byłaby zasada copyleftu - każdy twórca utworu
- aby mócudzielić skutecznej licencji (a więc także licencji
copyleftowej) - musiałby rejestrować swój utwór. Licencjobiorcy
będący twórcami opracowań także musieliby to robić, abywywiązać
się z obowiązków licencji copyleft. Dziś wystarczy, że
poinformuje się o udzieleniu licencji w wystarczająco wyraźny
sposób. Nierozwiązany jest także problem terytorialności
rozwiązania rejestracyjnego. W jaki sposób można by korzystać
w UE z utworów stworzonych w innych krajach?

System rejestracji utworów wymaga wobec tego głębokiego
przemyślenia. Wobec sygnalizowanych wyżej problemów, znacznie
bardziej bezpieczny dla domeny publicznej i wolnych licencji
wydaje się system rejestrujący użytkowników chcących skorzystać
z utworu, którzy nie mogą odnaleźć lub skontaktować się z
uprawnionym w celu udzielania licencji. System ten pozwoliłby
korzystać z takich instytucji jak przedawnienie roszczeń
uprawnionych lub licencje przymusowe, choć także wymagałby
wprowadzenia mechanizmów zabezpieczających przed nadużyciami.

Natomiast co do zasady KOED rekomenduje zwiększenie pewności
prawnej  użytkowników utworów poprzez inne mechanizmy, takie
jak rozszerzenie i uściślenie zakresu dozwolonego użytku
osobistego i instytucjonalnego - w szczególności w zakresie
niekomercyjnego korzystania z utworów, gdzie siłą rzeczy
użytkownicy nie dysponują zasobami i wiedzą pozwalającymi na
sprawdzenie statusu prawnoautorskiego utworu, jego licencji i
warunków wykorzystania.

What incentives for registration by rightholders could be
envisaged?

Wprowadzenie ewentualnych ograniczeń w ochronie
niezarejestrowanych utworów nie może być furtką do ich
przejmowania (zawłaszczania), zwłaszcza przez dużych wydawców i
inne dominujące podmioty komercyjne. Efektywną formą ochrony
przez zawłaszczaniem niezarejestrowanych utworów byłoby
stosowanie rozwiązania na wzór wolnych licencji z mechanizmem
'copyleft'.

How to improve the use and interoperability of identifiers

There are many private databases of works and other subject
matter held by producers, collective managementorganisations,
and institutions such as libraries, which are based to
a greater or lesser extent on the use of (more or less)
interoperable, internationally agreed ‘identifiers’.
Identifiers can be compared to a reference number embedded in a
work, are specific to the sector in which they have been
developed31

E.g. the International Standard Recording Code (ISRC) is used to
identify recordings, the International Standard Book Number
(ISBN) is used to identify books.

, and identify, variously, the work itself, the owner or the
contributor to a work or other subject matter. There are
notable examples of where industry is undertaking actions to
improve the interoperability of such identifiers and databases.
The Global Repertoire Database32

You will find more information about this initiative on the
following website:http://www.globalrepertoiredatabase.com/.

should, once operational, provide a single source of information
on the ownership and control ofmusical works worldwide. The
Linked Content Coalition33

You will find more information about this initiative (funded in
part by the European Commission) on the following website:
www.linkedcontentcoalition.org.

was established to develop building blocks for the expression
and management of rights and licensing across all content and
media types. It includes the development of a Rights Reference
Model (RRM) – a comprehensive data model for all typesof rights
in all types of content. The UK Copyright Hub34

You will find more information about this initiative on the
following website:http://www.copyrighthub.co.uk/.

is seeking to take such identification systems a step further,
and to create a linked platform,enabling automated licensing
across different sectors.

What should be the role of the EU in promoting the adoption
of identifiers in the content sector, and in promoting the
development and interoperability of rights ownership and
permissions databases?

KOED uważa, że próby stworzenia spójnego systemu metadanych dla
wszystkich utworów jest niemożliwe ze względu na wielkość
produkcji informacyjnej. System taki wymagałby wdrożenia zasady
że każdy autor np. zdjęcia z wakacji, albo każde dziecko
rysujące na zajęciach z plastyki (bo przecież prawie każde
takie zdjęcie i rysunek spełnia warunki definicyjne utworu)
poświęca czas na wypełnienie odpowiedniej tabeli. Oczekiwanie
takie uważamy za nierealistyczne.

Systemy identyfikatorów obecnie wykorzystywane są ważne w
konkretnych zastosowaniach - np. przy katalogowaniu zasobów
bibliotek i archiwów. Tutaj jednak istnieje problem braku
otwartych standardów. Przykładowo, popularny system DOI  ma
charakter zastrzeżony i płatny. System identyfikatorów, który
miałby być wprowadzony regulacją UE powinien być bezpłatny oraz
otwarty, a wszelkie dane w nim przechowywane dostępne za pomocą
interfejsów pozwalających na automatyczne przetwarzanie
informacji.

Term of protection – is it appropriate?

Works and other subject matterare protected under copyright for
a limited period of time. After the term of protection has
expired, a work falls into the public domain and can be freely
used by anyone (in accordance with the applicable national
rules on moral rights). The Berne Convention35

Berne Convention for the Protection of Literary and Artistic
Works,http://www.wipo.int/treaties/en/ip/berne/.

requires a minimum term of protection of 50 years after the
death of the author. The EU rules extend this term of
protection to 70 years after the death of the author (as do
many other countries, e.g. the US).

With regard to performers in the music sector and phonogram
producers, the term provided for in the EU rules also extend20
years beyond what is mandated in international agreements,
providing for a term of protection of 70 years after the first
publication. Performers and producers in the audio-visual
sector, however, do not benefit from such an extended term of
protection.

Are the current terms of copyright protection still appropriate
in the digital environment?

 YES – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO – Please explain if they should be longer or shorter

Koalicja Otwartej Edukacji opowiada się za skróceniem okresu
ochrony prawnoautorskiej praw majątkowych z lat 70 do - w
pierwszym etapie - lat 50, wynikających ze zobowiązańkonwencji
berneńskiej. Obecnie obowiązujący długi okres ochrony
skutecznie blokuje rozwój programów digitalizacyjnych w
bibliotekach i archiwach oraz potęguje problem utworów
osieroconych. Należy zrewidować dyrektywę 2006/116/WE i skrócić
czas ochrony zarówno praw autorskich jak i praw pokrewnych. Obok
ograniczenia okresu ochrony praw majątkowych gwarantowanie
społecznego prawa do domeny publicznej powinno być oparte o
wprowadzenie możliwie jasnych i czytelnych zasad przechodzenia
do niej chronionych utworów. Prawo do domeny publicznej będzie
efektywnie zagwarantowane jedynie wtedy, kiedy wprosty sposób
każdy będzie w stanie rozpoznać, czy dany utwór wciąż jest
chroniony, czy stał się już własnością publiczną.

Podkreślamy, że długi okres ochrony prawnoautorskiej utworów
wpływa negatywnie także na rynek komercyjny, powodując, że
starsze utwory wciąż objęte ochroną nie są wznawiane, podczas
gdy utwory z domeny publicznej ponownie wprowadzane są do
obrotu i ponownie stają się dostępne [zob. analizę Heald, Paul
J., How Copyright Makes Books and Music Disappear (and How
Secondary Liability Rules Help Resurrect Old Songs) (July 5,
2013).Illinois Program in Law, Behavior and Social Science
Paper No.LBSS14-07; Illinois Public Law Research Paper No.
13-54.]

Analogicznie, KOED rekomenduje skrócenie czasu trwania praw
wyłącznych praw pokrewnych do minimów określonych konwencjami
międzynarodowymi.

W dalszej perspektywie KOED zdecydowanie opowiada się podjęciem
przez UE inicjatywy  w odpowiednich ciałach międzynarodowych -
m. in. WTO i WIPO - na rzecz skrócenia czasu trwania
majątkowych praw wyłącznych do okresu niezbędnego do uzyskania
należytych przychodów w obrocie komercyjnym. Dla ogromnej
większości utworów czas ten nie przekracza kilku, góra
kilkunastu lat.

 NO OPINION

Limitations and exceptions in the Single Market

Limitations and exceptions tocopyright and related rights enable
the use of works and other protected subject-matter, without
obtaining authorisation from the rightholders, for certain
purposes and to a certain extent (for instance the use for
illustration purposes of an extract froma novel by a teacher in
a literature class). At EU level they are established in a
number of copyright directives, most notably Directive
2001/29/EC36

Plus Directive 96/9/ECon the legal protection of
databases;Directive 2009/24/ECon the legal protection of
computer programs,and Directive 92/100/ECon rental right and
lending right.

.

Exceptions and limitations in the national and EU copyright laws
have to respect international law37

Article 9(2) of the Berne Convention for the Protection of
Literary and Artistic Works (1971); Article 13 of the TRIPS
Agreement (Trade Related Intellectual Property Rights) 1994;
Article 16(2) of the WIPO Performers and Phonograms Treaty
(1996); Article 9(2) of the WIPO Copyright Treaty (1996).

. In accordance with international obligations, the EU acquis
requires that limitations and exceptions can only be applied in
certain special cases which do not conflict with a normal
exploitation of the work or other subject matter and do not
unreasonably prejudice the legitimate interest of the
rightholders.

Whereas the catalogue of limitations and exceptions included in
EU law is exhaustive (no other exceptions can be applied to the
rights harmonised at EU level)38

Other than the grandfathering of the exceptions of minor
importance for analogue uses existing in Member States at the
time of adoption of Directive 2001/29/EC (see, Art. 5(3)(o)).

, these limitations and exceptions are often optional39

With the exception of certain limitations: (i) in the Computer
Programs Directive, (ii) in the Database Directive, (iii)
Article 5(1) in the Directive 2001/29/EC and (iv) the Orphan
Works Directive.

, in the sense that Member States are free to reflect in
nationallegislation as many or as few of them as they wish.
Moreover, the formulation of certain of the limitations and
exceptions is general enough to give significant flexibility to
the Member States as to how, and to what extent, to implement
them (if they decide to do so). Finally, it is worth noting
that not all of the limitations and exceptions included in the
EU legal framework for copyright are of equivalent significance
in policy terms and in terms of their potential effect on the
functioning of the Single Market.

In addition, in the same manner that the definition of the
rightsis territorial (i.e. has an effect only within the
territory of the Member State), the definition of the
limitations and exceptions to the rights is territorial too (so
an act that is covered by an exception in a Member State "A" may
still require the authorisation of the rightholder once we move
to the Member State "B")40

Only the exception established in the recent Orphan Works
Directive (a mandatory exception to copyright and related
rights in the case where the rightholders are not known or
cannot be located) has been given a cross-border effect, which
means that, for instance, once a literary work – for instance a
novel – is considered an orphan work in a Member State, that
same novel shall be considered an orphan work in all Member
States and can be used and accessed in all Member States.

.

The cross-border effect of limitations and exceptions also
raises the question of fair compensation of rightholders. In
some instances, Member States are obliged to compensate
rightholders for the harm inflicted onthem by a limitation or
exception to their rights. In other instances Member States are
not obliged, but may decide, to provide for such compensation.
If a limitation or exception triggering a mechanism of fair
compensation were to be given cross-border effect (e.g. the
books are used for illustration in an online course given by an
university in a Member State "A" and the students are in a
Member State "B") then there would also be a need to clarify
which national law should determine the level of that
compensation and who should pay it.

Finally, the question of flexibility and adaptability is being
raised: what is the best mechanism to ensure that the EU and
Member States’ regulatory frameworks adapt when necessary
(either to clarify that certain uses arecovered by an exception
or to confirm that for certain uses the authorisation of
rightholders is required)? The main question here is whether
a greater degree of flexibility can be introduced in the EU
and Member States regulatory framework while ensuringthe
required legal certainty, including for the functioning of the
Single Market, and respecting the EU's international
obligations.

Are there problems arising from the fact that most limitations
and exceptions provided in the EU copyright directives
areoptional for the Member States?

YES – Please explain by referring to specific cases

Zwracamy uwagę, że także zasoby edukacyjne i zasoby kultury
udostępniane są online za pomocą Sieci o charakterze globalnym
i ponadnarodowym, jednak możliwość swobodnegoskorzystania (w
tym tworzenia edycji czy niezależnego rozpowszechniania) z tych
dostępnych globalnie treści jest już uzależniona od przepisów
konkretnego kraju. Jest to poważny problem, widoczny
szczególnie w kontekście nauczania czy uczenia się z
wykorzystaniem Internetu oraz działań instytucji GLAM (galerii,
bibliotek, archiwów i muzeów), które udostępniają swoje zbiory
online.

Współcześnie instytucje GLAM z całej Europy współpracują ze sobą
oraz korzystają ze wspólnych narzędzi (np. Europeany jako
wspólnego interfejsu do zbiorów instytucji z poszczególnych
krajów). Międzynarodowa europejska współpraca między
instytucjamidziedzictwa byłaby efektyczniejsza, gdyby wszystkie
kraje stosowały te same przepisy prawa autorskiego regulujące
np. udostępnie w Internecie zdigitalizowanych zbiorów.

 NO – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO OPINION

Should some/all of the exceptions be made mandatory and, if so,
is there a need for a higher level of harmonisation of such
exceptions?

 YES – Please explain by referring to specific cases

KOED postuluje wprowadzenie do systemu prawnego UE otwartej
normy dozwolonego wykorzystania utworów, w przeciwieństwie do
sztywnego katalogu legalnych wykorzystań jaki obecnie dominuje
w systemach prawnych krajów członkowskich. Także zapisane w
dyrektywie 2001/29 swobody użytkownika powinny być
obligatoryjne dla wszystkich krajów członkowskich UE.

Otwarta norma określałaby zakres wolności użytkowników (tak
prywatnych jak i instytucjonalnych) do pozyskiwania,
wykorzystywania i rozpowszechniania chronionych utworów w
celach nierynkowych, w tym zwłaszcza związanych z edukacją,
badaniami naukowymi i dydaktyką akademicką czy twórczością
artystyczną. Otwarta norma nie przedstawiałaby zamkniętego
katalogu uprawnień (tak jak jest to teraz w przepisach prawa
autorskiego dotyczących dozwolonego użytku), jedynie
wymieniałaby przykładowe konkretne uprawnienia ilustrujące
generalną zasadę.

 NO – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO OPINION

Should any new limitations and exceptions be added to or removed
from the existing catalogue?Please explain by referring to
specific cases.

KOED postuluje poszerzenie i dodefiniowanie dozwolonego użytku
osobistego i edukacyjnego poprzez wprowadzenie otwartej normy
praw użytkowników, wzorowanej na rozwiązaniach w prawie
amerykańskim. W zakresie dozwolonego użytku osobistego
postulujemy takie jego rozszerzenie aby nie było wątpliwości
legalności dzielenia się utworami w gronie osób, z którymi
pozostaje się w kontakcie on-line, jeżeli ma on charakter
niekomercyjny. Powinniśmy  mieć prawo do wolnego korzystania z
cudzych utworów jako osoby prywatne, o ile nie wiąże się to z
uzyskiwaniem przychodu (ani przez nas, ani przez pracodawcę,
pośrednika czy usługodawcę). W zakresie dozwolonego użytku
edukacyjnego postulujemy takie jego zdefiniowane, aby można
było z niego korzystać we wszystkich sytuacjach związanych z
kształceniem niezależnie od tego jaka instytucja realizuje ten
użytek.

Independently from the questions above, is there a need to
provide for a greater degree of flexibility in the EU
regulatoryframework for limitations and exceptions?

YES – Please explain why

KOED postuluje wprowadzenie do systemu prawnego UE i wszystkich
krajów otwartej normy dozwolonego wykorzystania utworów, w
przeciwieństwie do sztywnego katalogu legalnych wykorzystań
jaki obecnie dominuje w systemach prawnych krajów
członkowskich.

 NO – Please explain why

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO OPINION

If yes, what would be the best approach to provide for
flexibility? (e.g.interpretation by national courts and the
ECJ, periodic revisions of the directives, interpretations by
the Commission, built-in flexibility, e.g. in the form of a
fair-use or fair dealing provision / open norm, etc.)? Please
explain indicating what wouldbe the relative advantages and
disadvantages of such an approach as well as its possible
effects on the functioning of the Internal Market.

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Does the territoriality of limitations and exceptions, in your
experience, constitute a problem?

 YES – Please explain why and specify which exceptions you
are referring to

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO – Please explain why and specify which exceptions you are
referring to

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO OPINION

In the event that limitations and exceptions established at
national level were to have cross-border effect, howshould the
question of “fair compensation” be addressed, when such
compensation is part of the exception? (e.g. who pays whom,
where?)

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Access to content in libraries and archives

Directive 2001/29/EC enables Member States to reflect in their
national law a range of limitations and exceptions for the
benefit of publicly accessible libraries, educational
establishments and museums, as well as archives. If
implemented, these exceptions allow acts of preservation and
archiving41

Article 5(2)c of Directive 2001/29.

and enable on-site consultation of the works and other subject
matter in the collections of such institutions42

Article 5(3)n of Directive 2001/29.

. Thepublic lending (under an exception or limitation) by these
establishments of physical copies of works and other subject
matter is governed by the Rental and Lending Directive43

Article 5 of Directive 2006/115/EC.

.

Questions arise as to whether the current framework continues to
achieve the objectives envisaged or whether it needs to be
clarified or updated to cover use in digital networks. At the
same time, questions arise as to the effect of such a possible
expansion on the normal exploitation of works and other subject
matter and as to the prejudice this may cause to rightholders.
The role of licensing and possible framework agreements between
different stakeholders also needs to be considered here.

Preservation and archiving

The preservation of thecopies of works or other subject-matter
held in the collections of cultural establishments (e.g. books,
records, or films) – the restoration or replacement of works,
the copying of fragile works - may involve the creation of
another copy/ies of these worksor other subject matter. Most
Member States provide for an exception in their national laws
allowing for the making of such preservation copies. The scope
of the exception differs from Member State to Member State (as
regards the type of beneficiary establishments, the types of
works/subject-matter covered by the exception, the mode of
copying and the number of reproductions that a beneficiary
establishment may make). Also, the current legal status of new
types of preservation activities (e.g. harvesting and archiving
publicly available web content) is often uncertain.

(a)[In particular if you are an institutional user:]Have you
experienced specific problems when trying to use an exception
to preserve and archive specific works or other subject matter
inyour collection?

(b)[In particular if you are a right holder:]Have you
experienced problems with the use by libraries, educational
establishments, museum or archives of the preservation
exception?

YES – Please explain, by Member State, sector, and thetype of
use in question.

Dużym problemem są zabezpieczenia DRM blokujące np. konwersję
archiwizowanych treści do nowoczesnego, zgodnego ze standardem
formatu.

Chociaż w polskim prawie biblioteki mają możliwość legalnego
wykonywania kopii utworów w celu zachowania lub uzupełnienia
kolekcji, stosowanie tego uprawnienia w przypadku utworów w
postaci cyfrowej jest problematyczne.

Osobnym wątkiem związanym z blokowaniem archiwizacji przez
przepisy prawa autorskiego są programy zabezpieczania zbiorów
born digital, zwłaszcza zasobów sieci WWW.

Zabezpieczenia DRM uniemożliwiają także skuteczne tworzenie
cyfrowych archiwów osobistych czy rodzinnych, blokując
możliwość konwersji np. zabezpieczonych płyt muzycznych do
postaci plikó cyfrowych poddawanych następnie archiwizacji.

Zwracamy również uwagę na konieczność rozszerzenia
prawnoautorskich uprawnień bibliotecznych i archiwalnych na
wszystkie instytucje dziedzictwa bez ograniczania ich do
wybranych rodzajów instytucji.

Podkreślamy także, że instytucje dziedzictwa digitalizują swoje
zbiory nie tylko w celach ich zabezpieczania czy udostępniania
online, ale także zarządzania nimi; zbiory w postaci cyfrowej
mogą być np. automatycznie indeksowane, przetwarzane i
analizowane. Przepisy określające uprawnienia instytucji
kultury powinny uwzględniać także takie cele i taką formę
użycia zdigitalizowanych zbiorów. Ponieważ nie możemy
powiedzieć, jakie jeszcze formy wykorzystania zdigitalizowanych
zbiorów mogą zostać wynalezione, postulujemy wprowadzenie
otwartej normy regulującej ogólnie uprawnienia użytkowników
prywatnych i instytucjonalnych, uzupełnionej o otwarty zestaw
przykładów tych uprawnień w kontekście digitalizacji,
przetwarzania i archiwizacji zbiorów dziedzictwa.

 NO

 NO OPINION

If there are problems, how wouldthey best be solved?

W systemie prawa autorskiego należy przywrócić równowagę między
interesami wydawców a potrzebami społeczeństwa i działających
na jego rzecz instytucji kultury (bibliotek, archiwów, muzeów
itp.). Działalność publiczna instytucji GLAM powinna być
wyłączona spod monopolu prawnoautorskiego niezależnie od
tego, czy prowadzona jest w internecie czy poza jego
infrastrukturą (np. za pomocą terminali). Co więcej, prawo do
niekomercyjnego (nie dla zysku) wykorzystywania i
rozpowszechniania w celach edukacyjnych utworów powinno stać
się nową formułą dozwolonego użytku pozbawionego ograniczeń
podmiotowych i obowiązującą we wszystkich krajach UE.

If your view is that a legislative solution is needed, what
would be its main elements? Whichactivities of the beneficiary
institutions should be covered and under which conditions?

Aby instytucje pamięci (archiwa, biblioteki, muzea, galerie)
mogły w pełni wykorzystać potencjał internetu do realizowania
swojej społecznej misji należy:

- umożliwićudostępnianie chronionych utworów także poza
końcówkami wewnętrznych systemów teleinformatycznych
(terminalami);

- zalegalizować publikowanie utworów osieroconych. Nie powinno
nakładać się dodatkowych ograniczeń prawnoautorskich na
instytucje GLAM w zakresie udostępniania chronionych zasobów z
ich zbiorów oraz dodatkowo komplikować realizację ich misji
poprzez nowe wymagania licencyjne.

Należy także odejść od sztywnego wymieniania rodzajów instytucji
dziedzictwa, które miałyby uzyskać nowe uprawnienia. Niewiemy,
jaką instytucjonalną formę przyjąć może w przyszłości – wobec
gwałtownego rozwoju Internetu – praca ze zbiorami dziedzictwa
kulturowego.

Twórcy rozwiązań prawnych powinni brać pod uwagę także nowe
kierunku działalności instytucji dziedzictwa, zwłaszcza
sygnalizowany już przez UNESCO problem cyfrowego dziedzictwa i
dziedzictwa born digital (zasobów WWW i oprogramowania).
Projektowane rozwiązania nie powinny blokować tego nowego wątku
w misji tych instytucji.

If your view is that a differentsolution is needed, what would
it be?

System prawa autorskiego powinien rozpoznawać wyzwania związane
z cyfryzacją kultury i cyfrowym dziedzictwem oraz umożliwić nie
tylko instytucjom, ale także osobom prywatnym legalne
archiwizowanie i zabezpieczanie posiadanych przez siebie
zbiorów analogowych i cyfrowych.

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Off-premises access to library collections

Directive 2001/29/EC provides an exception for the consultation
of works and othersubject-matter (consulting an e-book,
watching a documentary) via dedicated terminals on the premises
of such establishments for the purpose of research and private
study. The online consultation of works and other
subject-matter remotely (i.e. when the library user is not on
the premises of the library) requires authorisation and is
generally addressed in agreements between
universities/libraries and publishers. Some argue that the law
rather than agreements should provide for the possibility to,
and theconditions for, granting online access to collections.

(a)[In particular if you are an institutional user:]Have you
experienced specific problems when trying to negotiate
agreements with rights holders that enable you to provide
remote access, includingacross borders, to your collections (or
parts thereof) for purposes of research and private study?

(b)[In particular if you are an end user/consumer:]Have you
experienced specific problems when trying to consult, including
across borders, works andother subject-matter held in the
collections of institutions such as universities and national
libraries when you are not on the premises of the institutions
in question?

(c)[In particular if you are aright holder:]Have you negotiated
agreements with institutional users that enable those
institutions to provide remote access, including across
borders, to the works or other subject-matter in their
collections, for purposes of research and private study?

Bardzo często niekorzystny dla biblioteki i jej użytkowników
kształt umowy licencyjnej proponowany jest z pozycji siły,
gdzie oczekuje się bezwarunkowej zgody i ogranicza pole do
negocjacji. Brak akceptacji dla oferty skutkuje jej wycofaniem.
Dużym wyzwaniem jest także udostępnianie tekstu licencji
jedyniew języku angielskim, co przerzuca na bibliotekę
konieczność jej tłumaczenia i opracowania. Umowy licencyjne z
zagranicznymi podmiotami komplikują także możliwość wypożyczeń
międzybibliotecznych czy udostępniania licencjonowanych
publikacji osobom innym niż pracownicy naukowi.

Obecne przepisy prawa autorskiego uniemożliwiają bibliotekom
dopełnienie swojej publicznej misji poprzez nieskrępowane i
wolne udostępnianie swoich zbiorów online. To naturalny etap
ewolucji misji instytucji takich jak biblioteki czyarchiwa, nie
może być jednakw pełni realizowany, gdy tymczasem użytkownicy
oczekują na swobodny dostęp do ich kolekcji.

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

If there are problems, how would they best be solved?

Należy zliberalizować zasady dozwolonego użytku naukowego oraz
adekwatne uprawnienia bibliotek i pozwolić im na swobodne
wypożyczanie chronionych utworów w celach edukacyjnych i
naukowych także poza terminalami i siecią lokalną. Równolegle
Unia Europejskapowinna wdrażać standard otwartego dostępu do
publikacji i danych naukowych tworzonych ze środkó publicznych
w systemie europejskiej nauki.

Ponownie postulujemy też, aby zamiast wprowadzania zamkniętego
katalogu uprawnień ograniczonych do wybranych rodzajów
użytkowników, wypracowana została otwara norma uprawnień
dostępnych dla użytkowników instytucjonalnych i prywatnych,
która zagwarantowałaby m.in. wolność korzystania z publikacji
naukowych czy prawo bibliotek do publikacji swoich zbiorów
online.

If your view is that a legislative solution is needed, what
would be its main elements? Which activities of the beneficiary
institutions should be covered and under which conditions?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

If your view is that a different solution is needed, what would
it be?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

E – lending

Traditionally, public libraries have loaned physical copies
ofworks (i.e. books, sometimes also CDs and DVDs) to their
users. Recent technological developments have made it
technically possible for libraries to provide users with
temporary access to digital content, such as e-books, music or
films via networks. Underthe current legal framework, libraries
need to obtain the authorisation of the rights holders to
organise such e-lending activities. In various Member States,
publishers and libraries are currently experimenting with
different business models for the making available of works
online, including direct supply of e-books to libraries by
publishers or bundling by aggregators.

(a)[In particular if you are alibrary:]Have you experienced
specific problems when trying to negotiate agreements to enable
the electronic lending (e-lending), including across borders, of
books or other materials held in your collection?

(b)[In particular if you are an end user/consumer:]Have you
experienced specific problems when trying to borrow books or
other materials electronically (e-lending), including across
borders, from institutions such as public libraries?

(c)[In particular if you are aright holder:]Have you negotiated
agreements with libraries to enable them to lend books or other
materials electronically, including across borders?

 YES – Please explain with specific examples

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO

 NO OPINION

If there are problems, how would they best be solved?

Koalicja Otwartej Edukacji popiera rekomendacje organizacji
EBLIDA (European Bureau of Library Information and
DocumentationAssociations) w zakresie rozszerzenia uprawnień
bibliotek co do pozyskiwania, przechowywania oraz wypożyczania
ebooków
(http://www.eblida.org/Special%20Events/Key-principles-acquistion-eBooks-November2012/GB_English%20Version%20Key%20Principles.pdf).Równolegle
jednak należy rozszerzyć wolności każdego użytkownika w zakresie
korzystania z chronionych utworów w postaci analogowej czy
cyfrowej w celach edukacyjnych, naukowych i niekomercyjnych
(nierynkowych) poprzez wprowadzenie otwartej normy, o której
wspominaliśmy w poprzednich punktach.

The following two questions are relevant both to this point (n°
3) and the previousone (n° 2).

[In particular if you are an institutional user:]What
differences do you see in the management of physical and online
collections, including providing access to your subscribers?
What problems have you encountered?

Należy zrównać uprawnieniabibliotek w zakresie zarządzania i
udostępniania utworów w postaci analogowej z uprawnieniami w
zakresie utworów w postaci cyfrowej. Rozróżnienie treści
kultury i nauki komplikuje działania bibliotek i tworzy wiele
niejasności co do rozumienia konkretnychprzepisów prawnych,
powstałych często jeszcze przed epoką cyfryzacji.

Dla wielu osób Internet jest dziś przestrzenią rozwijania
osobistych kolekcji. Niestety przepisy prawa autorskiego
ograniczają tę aktywność, faktycznie dyskryminując kolekcje
cyfrowe wporównaniu z tradycyjnymi kolekcjami zbiorów
analogowych. Znów wprowadzić tu należy wątek rozszerzenia
uprawnień użytkowników co do pozyskiwania, korzystania i
rozpowszechniania chronionych utworów w celach badawczych,
edukacyjnych czy nierynkowych.

Pojawia się tutaj także wątek prawa spadkowego, związany z
przekazywaniem cyfrowych kolekcji po śmierci ich właściciela,
jedynie pośrednio związany z przepisami prawa autorskiego.

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

[Inparticular if you are a right holder:]What difference do you
see between libraries’ traditional activities such as
on-premises consultation or public lending andactivities such
as off-premises (online, at a distance) consultation and
e-lending? What problems have you encountered?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Mass digitisation

The term “mass digitisation” is normally used to refer to
efforts by institutions such as libraries and archives to
digitise (e.g. scan) the entire content or part of their
collections with an objective to preserve these collections
and, normally, to make them available to the public. Examples
are efforts by libraries to digitise novels form the early part
of the 20thcentury or whole collections of pictures of
historical value. This matter has been partly addressed at the
EU level by the 2011 Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) on key
principles on the digitisation and making available of out
of commerce works (i.e. workswhich are no longer found in the
normal channels of commerce), which is aiming to facilitate
mass digitisation efforts (for books and learned journals) on
the basis of licence agreements between libraries and similar
cultural institutions on the one hand and the collecting
societies representing authors and publishers on the other44

You will find more information about his MoU on the following
website:http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/copyright/out-of-commerce/index_en.htm.

. Provided the required funding is ensured (digitisation
projects are extremely expensive), the result of this MoU
should be that books that are currently to be found only in the
archives of, for instance, libraries will be digitised and made
available online to everyone. The MoU is based on voluntary
licences (granted by Collective Management Organisations on the
basis of the mandates they receive from authors and publishers).
SomeMember States may need to enact legislation to ensure the
largest possible effect of such licences (e.g. by establishing
in legislation a presumption of representation of a collecting
society or the recognition of an “extended effect” to the
licences granted)45

France and Germany have already adopted legislation to back the
effects of the MoU.The French act (LOI n° 2012-287 du 1er mars
2012 relative à l'exploitation numérique des livres
indisponibles du xxe siècle) foresees collective management,
unlessthe author or publisher in question opposes such
management.The German act (Gesetz zur Nutzung verwaister und
vergriffener Werke und einer weiteren Änderung des
Urheberrechtsgesetzes vom 1.Oktober 2013) contains a legal
presumption of representation by acollecting society in
relation to works whose rightholders are not members of the
collecting society.

.

[In particular if you are an institutional user,engaging or
wanting to engage in mass digitisation projects, a right
holder, a collective management organisation:]Would it be
necessary in your country to enact legislation to ensure that
the results of the 2011 MoU (i.e. the agreements concluded
between libraries and collecting societies) have a cross-border
effect so that out of commerce works can be accessed across the
EU?

 YES – Please explain why and how it could best be achieved

Tak. Problem utworów osieroconych i niedostępnych w handlu
skutecznie blokuje rozwój projektów digitalizacyjnych i nie
pozwala na pełne rozwinięcie potencjału bibliotek, archiwów i
muzeów cyfrowych, także w sferze edukacji i nauczania.
Digitalizowane zbiory to przecież także zasoby edukacyjne,
które powinny być wykorzystywane w szkołach oraz oddolnych
projektach edukacyjnych. Dostępne rozwiązania prawne nie mają
charakteru kompleksowego, a taki jest wymagany, aby uwolnić
instytucje kultury od barier w digitalizacji i spełnić
oczekiwania społeczne w tym zakresie.

Utwory osierocone i niedostępne w handlu to tylko jeden rodzaj
utworów - nowa regulacja powinna jednak objąć biblioteki i
archiwa oraz inne podmioty uprawnieniami w zakresie
digitalizacji wszystkich utworów bez względu na ich status,
jeśli tylko dzieje się to w interesie publicznym w celach
naukowych, edukacyjnych czy innych celach nierynkowych.
Rozbudowywanie i tak już skomplikowanego systemu przepisów w
tym zakresie nie jest ani w interesie bibliotek i archiwów, ani
tym bardziej w interesie ich użytkowników. Z pewnością nie
powinno nakładać się dodatkowych ograniczeń prawnoautorskich na
instytucje GLAM w zakresie udostępniania chronionych zasobów z
ich zbiorów oraz dodatkowo komplikować realizację ich misji
poprzez nowe wymagania licencyjne.

 NO – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO OPINION

Would it be necessary to develop mechanisms, beyond those
already agreed for other types of content (e.g. for audio- or
audio-visual collections, broadcasters’ archives)?

YES – Please explain

Tak. Swoboda digitalizacji powinna objąć wszystkie rodzaje
dzieł. Twórcy nowych norm prawa autorskiego powinni uznać
prymat społecznej wartości digitalizacji zasobów kultury nad
partykularnymi interesami twórców.

 NO – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO OPINION

Teaching

Directive 2001/29/EC46

Article 5(3)a of Directive 2001/29.

enables Member States to implement in their national legislation
limitations and exceptions for the purpose of illustration for
non-commercial teaching. Such exceptions would typically allow
a teacher to use parts of or full works to illustrate his
course, e.g. by distributing copies of fragments of a book or
of newspaper articles in the classroom or by showing protected
content on a smart board without having to obtain authorisation
from the right holders. The open formulation of this (optional)
provisionallows for rather different implementation at Member
States level. The implementation of the exception differs from
Member State to Member State, with several Member States
providing instead a framework for the licensing of content for
certain educationaluses. Some argue that the law should provide
for better possibilities for distance learning and study at
home.

(a)[In particular if you are an end user/consumer or an
institutional user:]Have you experienced specific problems when
trying to use works or other subject-matter for illustration for
teaching, including across borders?

(b)[In particular if you are a right holder:]Have you
experienced specific problems resulting from the way in which
works or other subject-matter are used for illustration for
teaching, including across borders?

YES – Please explain

W polskiej praktyce prawnej istnieje problem
rozpoznanialegalności korzystania z utworów w celach
dydaktycznych w inny sposób niż poprzez korzystanie z
fizycznych kopii dostępnych w miejscu nauczania (np. w
bibliotece).

Obecne przepisy definiujące dozwolony użytek edukacyjny zamykają
działalność edukacyjną w murach szkoły i utrudniają
wykorzystanie potencjału internetu w nauczaniu. Nauczyciele nie
mogą legalnie udostępniać chronionych utworów online na stronach
internetowych prowadzonych przez nich zajęć czy na stronach klas
lub szkoły. Utrudnione jest także tworzenie kursów
e-learningowych oraz korzystanie z bogatych edukacyjnych
zasobów Internetu bezpośrednio na lekcji.

Nowym kontekstem, jaki rozważyć powinni ustawodawcy pracujący
nad reformą prawa autorskiego powinna być także rosnąca
popularność czytników itabletów jako narzędzi edukacyjnych
wykorzystywanych w klasie. Wprowadza ona dodatkowe wyzwania
związane z redystrybucją chronionych utworów w celach
edukacyjnych.

 NO

 NO OPINION

If there are problems, how would they best be solved?

KoalicjaOtwartej Edukacji zwraca uwagę na niejasne zasady
dozwolonego użytku edukacyjnego zapisanego np. w polskich
przepisach prawa autorskiego Dużym problemem jest prawidłowe
rozpoznanie podmiotów uprawnionych do korzystania z tych
uprawnień (zgłaszane są wątpliwości, czy definicja instytucji
oświatowej faktycznie obejmuje wszystkich zajmujących się
edukacją). Dziś edukacja przestała być domeną szkoły i
instytucji - powszechną praktyką jest samoedukacja czy uczenie
się w ramach grup nieformalnych (także np. w ramach
tematycznych społeczności internetowych). Reforma prawa
autorskiego powinna iść w kierunku zredukowania ograniczeń
podmiotowych co do edukacyjnego wykorzystania chronionych
utworów. Należy dążyć do stanu, w którym każde niekomercyjne,
edukacyjne wykorzystanie i rozpowszechnianie utworu będzie
dozwolone, co można zdefiniować za pomocą otwartej normy
wolności użytkowników.

Wiele problemów można teoretycznie rozwiązać licencjami, ale w
praktyce wielu licencjodawców nie chce udzielać licencji, które
w ich mniemaniu powodują utratę kontroli nad dziełami. W
efekcie, zakres uprawnień jakie uzyskuje obywatel bądź
instytucja jest niewielki. Naszym zdaniem utwory do których
prawa autorskie są w posiadaniu skarbu państwa już teraz
powinny być udostępnione do dowolnego wykorzystania. Może być
to zrealizowane poprzez wyłączenie ich spod ochrony, może być
zrealizowane poprzez udzielenie wolnej licencji. Analogicznie,
rozwiązania dotyczące wykorzystania edukacyjnego mogą być
realizowane poprzez rozszerzenie zakresu dozwolonego użytku,
albo poprzez licencję przymusową. Korzystanie z utworów w
interesie publicznym nie powinno być uzależnione od woli
uprawnionego, gdyż taki system będzie nieefektywny choćby z
powodu wysokich "kosztów transakcyjnych" (rozumianych jako
czas,zasoby i know-how niezbędne do uzyskania licencji,
niezależnie od tego czy jest ona odpłata i darmowa).

Natomiast zdecydowanie KOED opowiada się za obligatoryjnym
udostępnianiem zasobów edukacyjnych i naukowych stworzonych z
większościowym udziałem środkówpublicznych na wolnych
licencjach, dopuszczając tutaj co najwyżej ograniczony i
rozsądny okres embarga.

What mechanisms exist in the market place to facilitate the use
of content for illustration for teaching purposes? How
successful are they?

Poza ograniczonych wyłącznie do publicznych podmiotów
oświatowych przepisów dozwolonego użytku edukacyjnego jedyną w
Polsce formą legalizacji wykorzystania chronionych utworów w
nauczaniu jest korzystanie z licencji. Licencjonowanie w
przypadku zasobów edukacyjnych tworzonych przez komercyjne
utwory polega jednak często na blokowaniu nawet części tych
uprawnień, które wynikają z dozwolonego użytku edukacyjnego czy
prywatnego. Narzędziem ograniczania podstawowych praw
użytkowników są np. zabezpieczenia techniczne (DRM).

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

If your view is that a legislative solution is needed, what
would be its main elements? Which activities of the beneficiary
institutions should be covered and under whatconditions?

Prawo autorskie powinno być dostosowane do trendów kultury, w
której funkcjonuje. Dziś Internet stał się ważnym narzędziem
edukacyjnym i korzystanie z zasobów internetowych w nauczaniu
czy samoedukacji jest czymś naturalnym, uznanym za standard.
Tymczasem przepisy prawa autorskiego wciąż blokują pełne
wykorzystanie możliwości edukacyjnych Sieci.

Rozwiązaniem tej sytuacji byłaby zmiana akcentów w systemie
prawa autorskiego i powrót do idei, że jest ono raczej
wyjątkiem od reguły niż generalną zasadą. Należy wprowadzić
powszechną otwartą normę definiującą w możliwie szeroki sposób
wolności użytkowników (prywatnych i instytucjonalnych) w
zakresie korzystania z utworów chronionych w celach
nierynkowych, szczególnie zaś w celach edukacyjnych, badawczych
czy artystycznych. Wolności te powinny dotyczyć każdej formy i
postaci utworu, a wszystkie umowy i licencje, które stałyby w
sprzeczności z tą generalną zasadą wolności powinny zostać
uznane za nieważne.

If your view is that a different solution isneeded, what would
it be?

Jesteśmy przekonani, że nauczanie i edukacja to aktywności,
które powinny mieć pierwszeństwo przed partykularnymi
interesami twórców i wydawców. W interesie społecznym są jak
najszersza dostępność i jak najszersze prawa wykorzystania
utworów w edukacji.

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Research

Directive 2001/29/EC47

Article 5(3)a of Directive 2001/29.

enables Member States to choose whether to implement in their
national laws a limitation for the purpose of non-commercial
scientific research. The open formulation of this (optional)
provision allows for rather different implementations at Member
States level.

(a)[In particular if you are an end user/consumer or an
institutional user:]Have you experienced specific problems when
trying to use works or other subject matter in the context of
research projects/activities, including across borders?

(b)[In particular if you are a right holder:]Have you
experienced specific problemsresulting from the way in which
works or other subject-matter are used in the context of
research projects/activities, including across borders?

YES – Please explain

Istniejące już na poziomie UE dyrektywy i przepisy wprowadzają
komplikacje w rozpoznawaniu zakresu dozwolonego użytku co do
wykorzystania chronionych utworów w pracy naukowej i
dydaktycznej. Korzystanie z produktów, publikacji czy innych
utworów łączących w sobie wiele różnych przedmiotów ochrony
(np. baz danych) powoduje niejasności co do możliwości i
zakresu stosowania przepisów dozwolonego użytku. Dalsze
problemy z korzystaniem z dozwolonego użytku naukowego wywołuje
stosowanie zabezpieczeń technicznych (DRM).

Chociaż w polskim prawie istnieje instytucja dozwolonego użytku
naukowego, jej zakres nie obejmuje aktywności naukowych
realizowanych poza instytucją (np. w ramach badań nauki
obywatelskiej czy działalności naukowej w nurcie Nauki 2.0),
przez podmioty komercyjne lub inne, niemające statusu
instytucji naukowej. Podowuje to rozwój szarej strefy prawa
autorskiego w tej branży.

 NO

 NO OPINION

If there are problems, how would they best be solved?

Jednym z rozwiązań powyższego problemu może być silne wsparcie
instytucji dozwolonego użytku i jej upowszechnienie na
wszystkie kraje UE. Korzystanie z utworów do celów naukowych,
edukacyjnych czy nierynkowych powinno być dozwolone bez względu
na status podmiotu (nieograniczone wyłącznie do instytucji
naukowych czy oświatowych). Należy także wzmacniać - również
poza reformą prawa autorskiego -pozycję autorów publikacji
naukowych wobec wydawców, domagających się często pełnego
przeniesienia praw i w ten sposób blokującego swobodne
publikowanie tych prac w internecie. Dziś podatnicy dwa razy
zmuszeni są płacić za publikacje naukowe - finansującinstytucje
badawcze oraz opłacając dostęp do zamkniętych.Należy to zmienić.


What mechanisms exist in the Member States to facilitate the use
of content for research purposes? How successful are they?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Disabilities

Directive 2001/29/EC48

Article 5 (3)b of Directive 2001/29.

provides for an exception/limitation for the benefit of people
with a disability. The open formulation of this (optional)
provision allows for rather different implementations at Member
States level. At EU and international level projects have been
launched to increase the accessibility of works and other
subject-matter for persons with disabilities (notably by
increasing the number of works published in special formats and
facilitating their distribution across the European Union)49

The European TrustedIntermediaries Network (ETIN) resulting from
a Memorandum of Understanding between representatives of the
right-holder community (publishers, authors, collecting
societies) and interested parties such as associations for
blind and dyslexic persons
(http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/copyright/initiatives/access/index_en.htm)
and the Trusted Intermediary Global Accessible Resources (TIGAR)
project in WIPO (http://www.visionip.org/portal/en/).

.

The Marrakesh Treaty50

Marrakesh Treaty to Facilitate Access to Published Works by
Visually Impaired Persons and Persons with Print Disabilities,
Marrakesh, June 17 to 282013.

has been adopted to facilitate access to published works for
persons who are blind, visually impaired, or otherwise print
disabled. The Treaty creates a mandatory exception to copyright
that allows organisations for the blind to produce,
distributeand make available accessible format copies to
visually impaired persons without the authorisation of the
rightholders. The EU and its Member States have started work to
sign and ratify the Treaty. This may require the adoption of
certain provisions at EUlevel (e.g. to ensure the possibility
to exchange accessible format copies across borders).

(a)[In particular if you are a person with a disability or an
organisation representing persons with disabilities:]Have you
experienced problems with accessibility to content, including
across borders, arising from Member States’ implementation of
this exception?

(b)[In particular if you are an organisation providing services
for persons with disabilities:]Have you experienced problems
when distributing/communicating works published in special
formats across the EU?

(c)[In particular if you are a right holder:]Have you
experienced specific problems resulting from the application of
limitations or exceptions allowing for the
distribution/communication of workspublished in special
formats, including across borders?

 YES – Please explain by giving examples

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO

 NO OPINION

If there are problems, what could be done to
improveaccessibility?

Prawo dostępu do kultury i swobody korzystania z utworów powinno
dotyczyć wszystkich bez wyjątku, niezależnie od stopnia
niepełnosprawności. Rozwiązanie tego problemu może być
realizowane przez rozszerzenie dozwolonego użytku, może być
realizowane przez licencje przymusowe - istotne jest, by prawo
przygotowania i rozpowszechniania wersji przystosowanej do
odbioru przez osoby niepełnosprawne nie zależało od woli
uprawnionego.

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

What mechanisms exist in the market place to facilitate
accessibility to content? How successful are they?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Text and datamining

Text and data mining/content mining/data analytics51

For the purpose of the present document, the term “text and data
mining” will be used.

are different terms used to describe increasingly important
techniques used in particular by researchers for the
exploration of vast amounts of existing texts and data (e.g.,
journals, web sites, databases etc.). Through the use of
software or other automated processes, an analysis is made of
relevant texts and data in order to obtain new insights,
patterns andtrends.

The texts and data used for mining are either freely accessible
on the internet or accessible through subscriptions to e.g.
journals and periodicals that give access to the databases of
publishers. A copy is made of the relevant texts and data (e.g.
on browser cache memories or in computers RAM memories or onto
the hard disk of a computer), prior to the actual analysis.
Normally, it is considered that to mine protected works or
other subject matter, it is necessary to obtain authorisation
from the right holders for the making of such copies unless
such authorisation can be implied (e.g. content accessible to
general public without restrictions on the internet, open
access).

Some argue that the copies required for text and data mining are
coveredby the exception for temporary copies in Article 5.1 of
Directive 2001/29/EC. Others consider that text and data mining
activities should not even be seen as covered by copyright. None
of this is clear, in particular since text and data mining does
not consist only of a single method, but can be undertaken in
several different ways. Important questions also remain as to
whether the main problems arising in relation to this issue go
beyond copyright (i.e. beyond the necessity or not to obtain
the authorisation to use content) and relate rather to the need
to obtain “access” to content (i.e. being able to use e.g.
commercial databases).

A specific Working Group was set up on this issue in the
framework of the "Licences for Europe" stakeholder dialogue. No
consensus was reached among participating stakeholders on either
the problems to be addressed or the results. At the same time,
practical solutions to facilitate text and data mining of
subscription-based scientific content were presented by
publishers as anoutcome of “Licences for Europe”52

See the document “Licences for Europe – ten pledges to bring
more content
online”:http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/copyright/docs/licences-for-europe/131113_ten-pledges_en.pdf.

. In the context of these discussions,other stakeholders argued
that no additional licences should be required to mine material
to which access has been provided through a subscription
agreement and considered that a specific exception for text and
data mining should be introduced, possibly on the basis of
a distinction between commercial and non-commercial.

(a)[In particular if you are an end user/consumer or an
institutionaluser:]Have you experienced obstacles, linked to
copyright, when trying to use text or data mining methods,
including across borders?

(b)[In particular if you are a service provider:]Have you
experienced obstacles, linked to copyright, when providing
services based on text or data mining methods, including across
borders?

(c)[In particular if you are a right holder:]Have you
experienced specific problems resulting from the use of text
and data mining in relation to copyright protected content,
includingacross borders?

 YES – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO OPINION

If there are problems, howwould they best be solved?

Polskie przepisy dozwolonego użytku naukowego pozwalają na
zwielokrotnianie i wykorzystywanie utworów w celu prowadzenia
badań naukowych. Łącznie z prawem cytatu daje to odpowiednie
uprawnienia badaczkom i badaczom, którzy w swojej pracy
wykorzystują treści objęte ochroną (np. podczas budowy korpusów
językowych) oraz pozwalają na legalne cytowanie w publikacjach
naukowych, o ile ich działania ograniczają się do nauki
rozumianej zachowawczo i tradycyjnie. Jeżeli natomiast
naukowcyangażują się w działania takie jak e-learning,
publikowanie w otwartym dostępie, maszynowa analiza tekstów i
danych, to pojawiają się wątpliwości, czy nadal działają w
ramach dozwolonego użytku. Regulacje na poziomie UE powinny
gwarantować nauce uprawnienia adekwatne do metod naukowych
stosowanych w XXI wieku we wszystkich krajach wspólnoty.

Wielu naukowców intensywnie korzysta z Internetu do promocji
swoich badań, dyskusji nad ich wynikami I wspólnej komunikacji
ze środowiskiem naukowym. Badacze Ibadaczki tworzą blogi,
własne repozytoria, katalogi bibliografii, wymieniają się
komentarzami I literaturą naukową. Prawo autorskie powinino
dostrzegać zmiany w systemie komunikacji naukowej określane
jako Nauka 2.0.

Należy wzmocnić instytucję dozwolonego użytku w taki sposób, aby
zezwalała każdemu (bez konieczności bycia przypisanym do
instytucji naukowej) korzystanie z chronionych utworów w celach
badawczych i naukowych.

Wskazać w tym miejscu można także zagadnieniania prawne związane
z archiwizacją internetu (zasobów sieci WWW), prowadzoną przez
centralne publiczne instytucje dziedzictwa. Przepisy prawa
autorskiego ułatwiać powinny dbanie o zachowanie dziedzictwa
born digital i korzystanie z archiwów WWW w celach badawczych,
także poza umieszczonymi wbibliotecznych sieciach lokalnych
terminalami. Kontrowersje wokół dostępu do uruchomionego
niedawno przez British Library archiwum brytyjskiej domeny WWW
pokazują, że prawo autorskie jest dużym wyzwaniem wobec tego
typu projektów. Reforma prawa autorskiegoplanowana przez
Komisję powinna uwzględniać długą perspektywę jego
obowiązywania, a zatem brać pod uwagę zagadnienia takie jak
dziedzictwo born digital i archiwizacja Internetu.

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

If your view is that a legislative solution is needed, what
would be its main elements? Which activities should be covered
and under what conditions?

Wszelkie naukowe użycie chronionych utworów powinno być prawnie
dozwolone bez ograniczeń podmiotowych.Należy rozwiązań także
problemy wynikające z tego, że w przypadku zasobów poddawanych
analizie mechanicznej aktywne są ograniczenia wynikające z
ochrony utworów i ochrony baz danych.

If your view is that a different solution is needed, what would
it be?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Are there other issues, unrelated to copyright, that constitute
barriers to the use of text or data mining methods?

Wiele instytucji kultury publikując swoje zbiory robi to w
sposób uniemożliwiający łatwe pozyskiwanie i przetwarzanie w
celach naukowych publikowanych materiałów czy opisujących ich
metadanych, chociaż dostępne są już standardy publikowania
zdigitalizowanych zbiorów. Barierą w przetwarzaniu tych zbiorów
są też dodatkowe ograniczenia prawne narzucane przez instytucje
je udostępniające np. w regulaminach korzystania z bibliotek
czy repozytoriów cyfrowych. Wprowadzanie technicznych
organiczeń takich jak blokowanie pobierania czy instalowanie
znaków wodnychtakże utrudnia korzystanie z metod automatycznej
eksploracji danych.

User-generated content

Technological and service developments mean that citizens can
copy, use and distribute content at little to no financial
cost. As a consequence, new types ofonline activities are
developing rapidly, including the making of so-called
“user-generated content”. While users can create totally
original content, they can also take one or several
pre-existing works, change something in the work(s), and upload
the result on the Internet e.g. to platforms andblogs53

A typical example could be the “kitchen” or “wedding” video
(adding one's own video to a pre-existing sound recording), or
adding one's own text to a pre-existing photograph. Other
examples are “mash-ups”(blending two sound recordings), and
reproducing parts of journalistic work (report, review etc.) in
a blog.

. User-generated content (UGC) can thus cover the modification
of pre-existing works even if the newly-generated/"uploaded"
work does not necessarily require a creative effort and results
from merely adding, subtracting or associating some pre-existing
content with other pre-existing content. This kind of activity
is not “new” as such. However, the development of social
networking and social media sites that enable users to share
content widely has vastly changed the scale of such activities
and increased the potential economic impact for those holding
rights in the pre-existing works. Re-use is no longer the
preserve of a technically and artisticallyadept elite. With the
possibilities offered by the new technologies, re-use is open to
all, at no cost. This in turn raises questions with regard to
fundamental rights such the freedom of expression and the right
to property.

A specific Working Group was set up on this issue in the
framework of the "Licences for Europe" stakeholder dialogue. No
consensus was reached among participating stakeholders on either
the problems to be addressed or the results or even the
definition of UGC. Nevertheless, a wide range of views were
presented as to the best way to respond to this phenomenon. One
view was to say that a new exception is needed to cover UGC, in
particular non-commercial activities by individuals such as
combining existing musical works with videos, sequences of
photos, etc. Another view was that no legislative change is
needed: UGC is flourishing, and licensing schemes are
increasingly available (licence schemes concluded between
rightholders and platforms as well as micro-licences concluded
between rightholders and the users generating the content. In
any event, practical solutions to ease user-generated content
and facilitate micro-licensing for small users were pledged by
rightholders across different sectors as a result of the
“Licences for Europe” discussions54

See the document “Licences for Europe – ten pledges to bring
more content
online”:http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/copyright/docs/licences-for-europe/131113_ten-pledges_en.pdf.

.

(a)[In particular if you are an end user/consumer:]Have you
experienced problems when trying to use pre-existing works or
other subject matter to disseminate new content on the
Internet, including across borders?

(b)[In particular if you are a service provider:]Have you
experienced problems when users publish/disseminate new content
based on the pre-existing works or other subject-matter through
your service, including across borders?

(c)[In particular if you are a right holder:]Have you
experienced problems resulting from the way the users are using
pre-existing works or other subject-matter to disseminate new
content on the Internet, including across borders?

 YES – Please explain by giving examples

Należy pamiętać, że treści tworzone przez użytkowników to także
treści edukacyjne, powstające w ramach procesu dydaktycznego
czy tworzone przez nauczycieli w celu usprawiania nauczania. W
wielu przypadkach budowane są one z już istniejących
chronionychzasobów. Prawo autorskie w aktualnym kształcie nie
dostrzega tego zjawiska i nie pozwala na legalne
rozpowszechnianie tak powstałych treści, chociaż mogłyby one
wzbogacić edukacyjne zasoby Internetu dostępne dla wszystkich.

 NO

 NO OPINION

(a)[In particular if you are an end user/consumer or a right
holder:]Have you experienced problems when trying to ensure
that the work you have created (on the basis of pre-existing
works) is properly identified for online use? Are proprietary
systems sufficient inthis context?

(b)[In particular if you are a service provider:]Do you provide
possibilities for users that are publishing/disseminating the
works they have created (on the basis of pre-existing works)
through your service to properly identify these works for
online use?

 YES – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO OPINION

(a)[In particular if you are an end user/consumer or a right
holder):]Have you experienced problems when trying to be
remunerated for the use of the work you have created (on the
basis of pre-existing works)?

(b)[In particular if you are a service provider:]Do you provide
remuneration schemes for users publishing/disseminating the
works they have created (on the basis of pre-existing works)
through your service?

 YES – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO OPINION

If there are problems, how would they best be solved?

W zakresieuser generated contentKoalicja Otwartej Edukacji
sprzeciwia się dzieleniu twórców na “lepszych” i “gorszych”.
Termin  user generated content milcząco zakłada, że są
kategorie twórców nie zasługujących na pełną ochronę. Naszym
zdaniem godzi to w podstawy systemu praw autorskich, który
opiera się na aksjomacie ochrony praw niezależnie od wartości
dzieła czy osoby autora. System prawa autorskiego powinien
chronić użytkowników przed automatycznym lub proponowanym w
regulaminach jako standard zakładający zgodę przejmowaniem praw
dowytworzonych przez nich treści przez właścicieli
infrastruktury, w ramach której są one publikowane (np.
właściciela serwisu społecznościowego).

W tym kontekście wzmocnione powinny być także przepisy p.a.
dotyczące ochrony wizerunku i wykorzystywania go np. w
systemach reklamowych bez wyraźnej i świadomejzgody osoby,
której wizerunek ma być użyty. Problemy te są szczególnie
istotne ze względu na fakt, że coraz częściej uczniowie i
studenci tworzą i udostępniają swoje utwory w ramach procesu
edukacyjnego ,jako jego integralną część.

Należy pamiętać także, że częścią tzw.user generated contentsą
także treści edukacyjne tworzone niezależnie przez nauczycieli
czy uczniów w procesie dydaktycznym. Publikowane swobodnie
online powinny móc być swobodnie rozpowszechniane I
wykorzystywane przez każdego i w ten sposób realizować
edukacyjny potencjał Internetu.

If your view is that a legislative solution is needed, what
would be its main elements? Which activities should be covered
and under what conditions?

[Openquestion]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

If your view is that a different solution is needed, what would
it be?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Private copying and reprography

Directive 2001/29/EC enables Member States to implement in their
national legislation exceptions or limitations to the
reproduction right for copies made for private use and
photocopying55

Article 5. 2)(a) and (b) ofDirective 2001/29.

. Levies are charges imposed at national level on goods
typically used for such purposes (blank media, recording
equipment, photocopying machines, mobile listening devices such
as mp3/mp4 players, computers, etc.) with a view to compensating
rightholders for the harm they suffer when copies are made
without their authorisation by certain categories of persons
(i.e. natural persons making copies for their private use) or
through use of certain technique (i.e. reprography). In that
context,levies are important for rightholders.

With the constant developments in digital technology, the
question arises as to whether the copying of files by
consumers/end-users who have purchased content online - e.g.
when a person has bought an MP3 file and goes on to store
multiple copies of that file (in her computer, her tablet and
her mobile phone) - also triggers, or should trigger, the
application of private copying levies. It is argued that, in
some cases, these levies may indeed be claimed by rightholders
whether or not the licence fee paid by the service provider
already covers copies made by the end user. This approach could
potentially lead to instances of double payments whereby levies
could be claimed on top of service providers’ licence fees56

Communication "Unleashing the Potential of Cloud Computing in
Europe", COM(2012) 529 final.

57

These issues were addressed in the recommendations of Mr António
Vitorino resulting from the mediation on private copying and
reprography levies. You can consultthese recommendations on the
following
website:http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/copyright/docs/levy_reform/130131_levies-vitorino-recommendations_en.pdf.

.

There is also an on-going discussion as to the application or
not of levies to certain types of cloud-based services such as
personal lockers or personal video recorders.

In your view, is there a need to clarify at the EU level the
scope and application of the private copying and reprography
exceptions58

Art. 5.2(a) and 5.2(b) of Directive 2001/29/EC.

in the digital environment?

YES – Please explain

Jesteśmy przekonani, że prawa użytkowników do korzystania z
chronionych utworów w celach edukacyjnym, naukowym lub w celach
nierynkowych nie powinny być ograniczane rodzajem tych utworów
czy ich analogową lub cyfrową postacią. Użytkownicy powinni
mieć też pełne prawo legalnego obchodzenia zabezpieczeń (DRM),
o ile blokują oneuprawnienia wynikające z dozwolonego użytku.
Wszelkie umowy podpisywane między użytkownikami a wydawcami nie
mogą ograniczać ich podstawowych praw związanych z
niekomercyjnym korzystaniem z utworów - jest to szczególnie
istotne w perspektywie korzystania zchronionych utworów w
edukacji..

 NO – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO OPINION

Should digital copies made by end users for private purposes in
the context of a service that has beenlicensed by rightholders,
and where the harm to the rightholder is minimal, be subject to
private copying levies?59

This issue was also addressed in the recommendations of Mr
Antonio Vitorino resulting from the mediation on private
copying and reprographylevies

YES – Please explain

Należy zwiększyć kontrolę państwa nad przychodami z tytułu
opłatprivate copying leviesorazich redystrybucją, ponieważ
dziś nie są czytelne jej zasady. W publicznej komunikacji na
temat tego rodzaju opłat należy wyraźnie podkreślić, że łączą
się one z uprawnieniami użytkowników np. w zakresie kopiowania
chronionych utworów na własny użytek - być może instytucje
zajmujące się redystrybucją tych opłat powinny zostać
zobowiązane do informowania o takich prawach użytkowników.

Upodstaw idei opłatprivate copying leviesstoi założenie, że
nieoficjalna dystrybucja utworów poza kanałami kontrolowanymi
przez wydawców generuje im określone straty. Nie da się tego
jednak wciąż bezpośrednio udowodnić. Przepisy rekompensujące
straty twórców i wydawców wynikające z nieformalnej dystrybucji
i wykorzystywania utworów powinny być wdrażane na podstawie
wiarygodnych badań i analiz wykazujących te straty. Jeśli ich
nie ma, należy ponownie przemyśleć ideę opłatprivate copying
levies.

 NO – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO OPINION

How would changes in levies with respect to the application to
online services (e.g. services based on cloud computing
allowing, for instance, users tohave copies on different
devices) impact the development and functioning of new business
models on the one hand and rightholders’ revenue on the other?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Would yousee an added value in making levies visible on the
invoices for products subject to levies?60

This issue was also addressed in the recommendations of Mr
Antonio Vitorino resulting from the mediation on private
copying and reprography levies.

 YES – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO OPINION

Diverging national systems levy different products andapply
different tariffs. This results in obstacles to the free
circulation of goods and services in the Single Market. At the
same time, many Member States continue to allow the
indiscriminate application of private copying levies to all
transactions irrespective of the person to whom the product
subject to a levy is sold (e.g. private person or business). In
that context, not all Member States have ex ante exemption
and/or ex post reimbursement schemes which could remedy these
situations and reduce the number of undue payments61

This issue was also addressed in the recommendations of Mr
Antonio Vitorino resulting from the mediation on private
copying and reprography levies.

.

Have you experienced a situation where a cross-border
transaction resulted in undue levy payments, or duplicate
payments of the same levy, or other obstacles to the free
movement of goods or services?

 YES – Please specify the type of transaction and indicate
the percentage of the undue payments. Please also indicate how
a priori exemption and/or ex post reimbursement schemes could
help to remedy the situation.

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO OPINION

What percentage of products subject to a levy is sold to persons
other than natural persons for purposes clearly unrelated to
private copying? Do any of those transactions result in undue
payments? Please explain in detail the example youprovide (type
of products, type of transaction, stakeholders, etc.).

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Where such undue payments arise, what percentage of trade do
they affect? To what extent could a priori exemptions and/or ex
post reimbursement schemes existing in some Member States help
to remedy the situation?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

If you have identified specific problemswith the current
functioning of the levy system, how would these problems best
be solved?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Fair remuneration of authors and performers

The EU copyright acquis recognises for authors and performers a
number of exclusive rights and, in the case of performers whose
performances are fixed in phonograms, remuneration rights. There
are few provisions in the EU copyright law governing
thetransferof rights from authors or performers to producers62

See e.g. Directive 92/100/EEC, Art.2(4)-(7).

or determining who the owner of the rights is when the work or
other subject matter is created in the context of an employment
contract63

See e.g. Art. 2.3. of Directive 2009/24/EC, Art. 4 of Directive
96/9/EC.

. This is an area that has been traditionally left for Member
States to regulate and there are significant differences in
regulatory approaches. Substantial differences also exist
between different sectors of the creative industries.

Concerns continue to be raised that authors and performers are
not adequately remunerated, in particular but not solely, as
regards online exploitation. Many consider that the economic
benefit of new forms of exploitation is not being fairly
sharedalong the whole value chain. Another commonly raised
issue concerns contractual practices, negotiation mechanisms,
presumptions of transfer of rights, buy-out clauses and the
lack of possibility to terminate contracts. Some stakeholders
are of the opinionthat rules at national level do not suffice
to improve their situation and that action at EU level is
necessary.

[In particular if you are an author/performer:] What is the best
mechanism (or combination of mechanisms) to ensure that you
receive an adequate remuneration for the exploitation of your
works and performances?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Is there a need to act at the EU level (for instance to prohibit
certain clauses incontracts)?

 YES – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO – Please explain why

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO OPINION

If you consider that thecurrent rules are not effective, what
would you suggest to address the shortcomings you identify?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Respect for rights

Directive 2004/48/EE64

Directive 2004/48/ECof the European Parliament and of the
Council of 29 April 2004 on the enforcement of intellectual
property rights.

provides for a harmonised framework for the civil enforcement of
intellectual property rights, including copyright and related
rights. The Commission has consulted broadly on this text65

You will find more information on the following
website:http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/iprenforcement/directive/index_en.htm

. Concerns have been raised as to whether some of its provisions
are still fit to ensure a proper respect for copyright in the
digital age. On the one hand, the current measures seemto be
insufficient to deal with the new challenges brought by the
dissemination of digital content on the internet; on the other
hand, there are concerns about the current balance between
enforcement of copyright and the protection of fundamental
rights,in particular the right for a private life and data
protection. While it cannot be contested that enforcement
measures should always be available in case of infringement of
copyright, measures could be proposed to strengthen respect for
copyright when theinfringed content is used for a commercial
purpose66

For example when the infringing content is offered on a website
which gets advertising revenues that depend on the volume of
traffic.

. One means to do this could be to clarify the roleof
intermediaries in the IP infrastructure67

This clarification should not affect the liability regime of
intermediary service providers established by Directive
2000/31/EC on electronic commerce, which will remain unchanged.

. At the same time, there could be clarification of the
safeguards for respect of private life and data protection for
private users.

Should the civil enforcement system in the EU be rendered more
efficient for infringements of copyright committed with a
commercial purpose?

 YES – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO – Please explain

Zwracamy uwagę na nieetyczne praktyki wielu firm, opierających
swój model biznesowy na egzekwowaniu w imieniu twórców
przepisów prawa autorskiego w odniesieniu do osób nielegalnie
rozpowszechniających chronione utwory w Internecie, także
nastolatków i dzieci. Groźba wniesienia sprawy na drogę sądową
połączona jest z propozycją ugody związaną z zapłatą określonej
sumy na konto kancelarii. Jak podaje niemiecka organizacja
IGGDAW, rocznie tylko w tym kraju takim postępowaniem objętych
jest prawie 110 tys. osób. Praktyka tych firm ma wszelkie cechy
zastraszania, bowiem część z oskarżeń kierowanych w stronę
adresatów tego typu wezwań dotyczy całkowicie legalnych praktyk
wynikających np. z przepisów o dozwolonym użytku. Reforma
systemu prawa autorskiego w Unii Europejskiej powinna
zablokować taki model biznesowy.

 NO OPINION

In particular, is the current legal framework clear enough to
allow for sufficientinvolvement of intermediaries (such as
Internet service providers, advertising brokers, payment
service providers, domain name registrars, etc.) in inhibiting
online copyright infringements with a commercial purpose? If
not, what measures would be useful to foster the cooperation of
intermediaries?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Does the current civil enforcement framework ensure that the
right balance is achieved between the right to have
one’scopyright respected and other rights such as the
protection of private life and protection of personal data?

 YES – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO OPINION

A single EU Copyright Title

The idea of establishing a unified EU Copyright Title has been
present in the copyright debate for quite some time now,
although views as to the merits and thefeasibility of such an
objective are divided. A unified EU Copyright Title would
totally harmonise the area of copyright law in the EU and
replace national laws. There would then be a single EU title
instead of a bundle of national rights. Some see this asthe
only manner in which a truly Single Market for content
protected by copyright can be ensured, while others believe
that the same objective can better be achieved by establishing
a higher level of harmonisation while allowing for a certain
degree of flexibility and specificity in Member States’ legal
systems.

Should the EU pursue the establishment of a single EU Copyright
Title, as a means of establishing a consistent framework for
rights and exceptions to copyright across the EU, as well as a
singleframework for enforcement?

 YES

 NO

 NO OPINION

Should this be the next step in the development of copyright in
the EU? Does the current level of difference among the Member
State legislation mean that this is a longer term project?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Other issues

The above questionnaire aims to provide a comprehensive
consultation on the most important matters relating to the
current EU legal framework for copyright. Shouldany important
matters have been omitted, we would appreciate if you could
bring them to our attention, so they can be properly addressed
in the future.

Are there any other important matters related to the EU legal
framework for copyright? Please explain and indicate how such
matters should be addressed.

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

