


Public Consultationonthe review oftheEUcopyright rules

ContentsLIntroduction

2

Context of the consultation

2

How to submit replies to this questionnaire

3

Confidentiality3

Rights and the functioning of the Single Market

7

Why is it not possible to accessmany online content services
from anywhere in Europe?7

Is there a need for more clarity as regards the scope of what
needs to be authorised (or not) in digital transmissions?

10

The act of "making available"

10

Two rights involved in a single actof exploitation

11

Linking and browsing

12

Download to own digital content

13

Registration of works and other subject matter-is it a good
idea?

14

How to improve the use and interoperability of identifiers

15

Term of protection-is it appropriate?

15

Limitations and exceptions in the Single Market

C.

Research

25

D.

Disabilities

25

E.

Text and data mining

27

F.

User-generated content

28

IV.

Private copyins and reprosraphv

31

V.

Fair remuneration of authors and performers

33

VI.

Respect for rights

34

VII.

A singleEUCopyright Title

36

VIII.

Other issues

36

I.

Introduction

Context of the consultation

Over the last two decades,digital technology and the Internet
have reshaped the ways in which content is created,
distributed, and accessed. New opportunities have materialised
for those that create and produce content (e.g. a film, a
novel, a song), for new and existing distribution platforms,
for institutions such as libraries, for activities such as
research and for citizens who now expect to be able to access
content-for information, education or entertainment
purposes-regardless of geographical borders.

This new environment also presents challenges. One of them is
for the market to continue to adapt to new forms of
distribution and use. Another one is for the legislator to
ensure that the system of rights, limitations to rights and
enforcement remains appropriate and is adapted to the new
environment. This consultation focuses on the second of these
challenges: ensuring that theEUcopyright regulatory framework
stays fit for purpose in the digital environment to support
creation and innovation, tap the full potential of the Single
Market, foster growth and investment in our economy and promote
cultural diversity.

In its "Communication on Content in the Digital Single Market"1

Preservation and archiving

19

Off-premises access to library collections

20

E-lending

21

Mass digitisation

22

Teaching23

the Commission set out two paralleltracks of action: on the one
hand, to complete its on-going effort to review and to

23

modernise theEUcopyright legislative frameworkwith a view to a
decision in2014on whether to table legislative reform
proposals, and on the other, to facilitate practical
industry-led solutions through the stakeholder dialogue
"Licences for Europe" on issues on which rapid progress was
deemed necessary and possible.

The "Licences for Europe" process has been finalised now4. The
Commission welcomes the practical solutions stakeholders have
put forward in this context and will monitor their progress.
Pledges have been made by stakeholders in all fourWorking
Groups (cross border portability of services, user-generated
content, audiovisual andfilmheritage and text and data mining).
Taken together, the Commission expects these pledges to be a
further step in making the user environment easier in many
different situations. The Commission also takes note of the
fact that two groups-user-generated content and text and data
mining-did not reach consensus among participating stakeholders
on either the problems to be addressed or on the results. The
discussions and results of "Licences for Europe" will be also
taken into account in the context of the review of the
legislative framework.

As part of the review process, the Commission is now launching a
public consultation on issues identified in the Communication on
Content in the Digital Single Market, i.e.:"territoriality in
the Internal Market,harmonisation,limitations and exceptions to
copyright in the digital age; fragmentation of theEUcopyright
market; and how to improve the effectiveness and efficiency of
enforcement while underpinning its legitimacy in the
widercontext of copyright reform". Ashighlighted in the
October2013European Council

Conclusions5"Providing digital servicesand content across the
single market requires the establishment of a copyright regime
for the digital age. The Commission will therefore complete its
on-going review of theEUcopyright framework in spring2014.It is
important to modernise Europe's copyright regime and facilitate
licensing, while ensuring a high level protection of
intellectual property rights and taking into account cultural
diversity".

This consultation builds on previous consultations and public
hearings, in particular those on

the "Green Paper on copyright in the knowledge economy"6, the
"Green Paper on the online

7  8

distribution of audiovisual works" and "Content Online".These
consultations provided

valuable feedback from stakeholderson a number of questions, on
issues as diverse as the

territoriality of copyright and possible ways to overcome
territoriality, exceptions related to the

online dissemination of knowledge, and rightholders'
remuneration, particularly in the

audiovisual sector. Views were expressed by stakeholders
representing all stages in the value

chain, including right holders, distributors, consumers, and
academics. The questions elicited

widely diverging views on the best way to proceed. The "Green
Paper on Copyrightin the

Knowledge Economy" was followed up by a Communication. The
replies to the "Green Paper

on the online distribution of audiovisual works" have fed into
subsequent discussions on the

Collective Rights Management Directive and into the current
review process.

How to submit replies to this questionnaire

You are kindly asked to send your repliesby5February2014as a
word orpdfdocument tothe following e-mail address of DG
Internal Market and
Services:markt-copyright-consultation@ec.europa.eu.Please note
that replies sent after that date will not be taken into
account.

This consultation is addressed to different categories of
stakeholders. To the extent possible,the questions indicate the
category/ies of respondents most likely to be concerned by them
(annotation in brackets, before the actual question).
Respondents should nevertheless feel free to reply to any/all
of the questions. Also, please note that, apartfrom the
question concerning the identification of the respondent, none
of the questions is obligatory. Replies containing

answers only to part of the questions will be also accepted.

You are requested to provide your answers directly within this
consultation document. For the'Yes/No/No opinion" questions
please put the selected answer inboldandunderlineit so it is
easy for us to see your selection.

In your answers to the questions, you are invited to refer to
the situation inEUMember States.Youare also invited in
particular to indicate, where relevant, what would be the
impact of options you put forward in terms of costs,
opportunities and revenues.

The public consultation is available in English. Responses may,
however, be sent in any of the24official languages of theEU.

Confidentiality

The contributions received in this round of consultation as well
as a summary report presenting the responses in a statistical
and aggregated form will be published on the website of
DGMARKT.

Please note that all contributions received will be published
together with the identity of the contributor, unless the
contributor objects to the publication of their personal data
on thegrounds that such publication would harm his or her
legitimate interests. In this case, the contribution will be
published in anonymous form upon the contributor's explicit
request. Otherwise the contribution will not be published nor
will its content be reflected in the summary report.

Please read ourPrivacy statement.

Please identify yourself:

Name:

In the interests of transparency, organisations (including, for
example,NGOs,trade associations and commercial enterprises) are
invited to provide the publicwith relevant information about
themselves by registering in the Interest Representative
Register and subscribing to its Code of Conduct.

0If you are a Registered organisation, please indicate your
Register ID number below. Your contribution will then
beconsidered as representing the views of your organisation.

0If your organisation is not registered, you have the
opportunity toregister now. Responses from organisations not
registered will be published separately.

If you would like to submityour reply on an anonymous basis
please indicate it below by underlining the following answer:

0Yes, I would like to submit my reply on an anonymous basis

Type of respondent(Pleaseunderlinethe appropriate):

0End user/consumer(e.g. internetuser, reader, subscriber to
music or audiovisualservice, researcher, student)OR
Representative of end users/consumers

^ for the purposes of this questionnaire normally referred to in
questions as"end users/consumers"

0Institutional user(e.g. school, university, research centre,
library, archive)OR Representative of institutional users

^ for the purposes of this questionnaire normally referred to in
questions as"institutional users"

0Author/Performer OR Representative of authors/performers

0Publisher/Producer/Broadcaster OR Representative of
publishers/producers/ broadcasters

^the two above categoriesare, for the purposes of this
questionnaire, normallyreferred to in questions as"right
holders"

!Intermediary/Distributor/Other service provider(e.g. online
music or audiovisualservice, games platform, social media,
search engine, ICT industry)OR Representative of
intermediaries/distributors/other service providers

for the purposes of this questionnaire normally referred to in
questions as"service providers"

!Collective Management Organisation

!Public authority

! Member State

!Other(Please explain):

I.Rights and the functioning of the Single Market

Why is it not possible to access many online content services
from anywhere in Europe?

[The territorial scope of the rights involved in digital
transmissions and the segmentation of the market through
licensing agreements]

Holders of copyright and related rights-e.g. writers, singers,
musicians-do not enjoy a single protection in theEU.Instead,
they are protected on the basis of a bundle of national rights
in each Member State. Those rights have been largely harmonised
by the existingEUDirectives. However, differences remain and the
geographical scope of the rights is limited to the territory of
the Member State granting them. Copyright is thus territorial
in the sense that rights are

9

acquired and enforced on a country-by-country basis under
national law .

The dissemination of copyright-protected content on the
Internet-e.g. by a music streaming service,or by an online
e-book seller - therefore requires, in principle, an
authorisation for each national territory in which the content
is communicated to the public. Rightholders are, of

course, in a position to grant a multi-territorial or
pan-European licence, such that contentservicescan be provided
in several Member States and across borders. A number of steps
have been taken atEUlevel to facilitate multi-territorial
licences: the proposal for a Directive on

Collective Rights Management10should significantly facilitate
the delivery of multi-territorial

licences in musical works for online services11; the structured
stakeholder dialogue 'Licences12

for Europe" and market-led developments such as the on-going
work in the Linked Content Coalition13.

"Licences for Europe" addressed in particular the specific issue
of cross-border portability, i.e. the ability of consumers
having subscribed to online services in their Member State to
keep accessing them when travelling temporarily to other Member
States. As a result, representatives of the audio-visual sector
issued a joint statement affirming their commitment to continue

14

working towards the further development of cross-border
portability .

Despite progress, there arecontinued problems with the
cross-border provision of, and accessto,services. These
problems are most obvious to consumers wanting to access
services that are made available in Member States other than
the one in which they live. Not all online servicesare
available in all Member States and consumers face problems when
trying to access such services across borders. In some
instances, even if the "same" service is available in all
Member States, consumers cannot access the service across
borders (they can only access their "national" service, and if
they try to access the "same" service in another Member State
they are redirected to the one designated for their country of
residence).

This situation may in part stem from the territoriality of
rights and difficulties associated with the clearing of rights
in different territories. Contractual clauses in licensing
agreements between right holders and distributors and/or
between distributors and end users may also be at the origin of
some of the problems (denial ofaccess,redirection).

The main issue at stake here is, therefore, whether further
measures (legislative ornon­legislative,including market-led
solutions) need to be taken atEUlevel in the medium term15to
increase the cross-borderavailability of content services in
the Single Market, while ensuring an adequate level of
protection for right holders.

1.[In particular if you are an end user/consumer:]Have you faced
problems when trying to access online services in anEUMember
State other than the one in which you live?

!YES-Please provide examples indicating the Member State, the
sector and the type of content concerned (e.g. premium content
such as certain films and TV series, audio-visual content in
general, music, e-books, magazines, journals and newspapers,
games, applications and other software)

!NO

0NO OPINION

1.[In particular if you are a service provider:]Have you faced
problems when seeking to provide online services across borders
in theEU?

0YES-Please explain whether such problems, in your experience,
are related to copyright or to other issues (e.g. business
decisions relating to the cost of providing services across
borders, compliance with other laws such as consumer
protection)?Pleaseprovide examples indicating the Member State,
the sector and the type of content concerned (e.g. premium
content such as certain films and TV series, audio-visual
content in general, music, e-books, magazines, journals and
newspapers, games, applications and other software).

Ich habe eine persönliche Webseite für mein musikalisches
Schaffen. Vor einiger Zeit wollte ich einen Shop darauf
einstellen. Und habe mich dann erstmal von dieser Idee
entfernt, wegen weltweiter Handelsrechte. Daserschien mir viel
zu kompliziert, sich für den Fall der Fälle mit einer
weltweiten AGB anzusichern, die Kosten die das aufwirft, um
sich von einem Anwalt beraten zu lassen. Der eigene Verkauf
bringt aber natürlich den größten Gewinn für die Künstler.

[-- Image: Picture 1 --]

NO

[-- Image: Picture 2 --]

NO OPINION

1.[Inparticular if you are a right holder or a collective
management organisation:]How often are you asked to grant
multi-territorial licences? Please indicate,if possible, the
number of requests per year and provide examples indicating the
Member State, the sector and the type of content concerned.

[Open question]

Zumindest ist es mir im Moment nicht immer deutlich, daß ich
gefragt werde. Ich nehme an, daßich in den verschiedenen
Sozialen Netzwerken durch mein Einverständnis mit den AGBs
solchen Lizenzverhältnissen zustimme.

1.If you have identified problems in the answers to any of the
questions above-what would be the best way to tackle them?

[Open question]

DieFragen sind teils inhaltlich nicht einfach zu verstehen, wenn
man sich als Musiker nicht

hauptsächlich mit der Vermarktung befaßt.

Ich weiß teilweise gar nicht, um was für Marktphänomene es sich
handelt. Es wäre für mich einfacher, die Frage auf deutsch zu
lesen.

1.[Inparticular if you are a right holder or a collective
management organisation:]Are there reasons why, even in cases
where you hold all the necessary rights for all the territories
in question, you would still find it necessary orjustified to
impose territorial restrictions on a service provider (in
order, for instance, to ensure that access to certain content
is not possible in certain European countries)?

!YES-Please explain bygiving examples

Niemand kann den kompletten Überblick darüber bewahren, wo die
Inhalte im Netz kursieren. D.h. Inhalt wird genutzt, auch ohne
kommerziellen Gegenwert. Es müßten Plattformen aufgebaut
werden, durch deren Nutzung auch wieder ein wirklicher
Gegenwert für dieKreativen hergestellt wird. Im Moment wird
viel konsumiert, aber für die Erschaffung neuer Inhalte fließt
nicht genug zurück zu den Urhebern. Beschränkungen wären gut,
um eine Kontrollmöglichkeit zu haben.

0NO

0NO OPINION

1.[Inparticular if you are e.g. a broadcaster or a service
provider:]Are there reasons why, even in cases where you have
acquired all the necessary rights for all the territories in
question, you would still find it necessary or justified to
impose territorialrestrictions on the service recipient (in
order for instance, to redirect the consumer to a different
website than the one he is trying to access)?

0YES-Please explain by giving examples

Es kann sein, daß es verfügbaren Inhalt auf einer Seite gibt,
mit der ich mich nicht

einverstanden erklärt habe. Dann wäre es nützlich, den Nutzer
auf eine andere Seite umzuleiten.

0NO

0NO OPINION

1.Do you think that further measures (legislative or
non-legislative,including market- led solutions) are needed
atEUlevel to increase the cross-border availability of content
services in the Single Market,while ensuring an adequate level
of protection for right holders?

0YES-Please explain

DieFrage ist, wiedieRechteinhaber überhaupt noch geschützt
werden können.

Ich denke, es muß sich ein neues System etablieren. Kultur wird
konsumiert, und das nicht wenig. Fas alles ist fast immer
verfügbar im Netz, das ist eine Revolution. Aber wie bekommt
man den Gegenwert generiert, für die Autoren? Es müssen
Werkzeuge erstellt werden, oder Abrechnungswege.
Rechenautomatismen, die Nutzungen aufzeigen können.

0NO-Please explain

0NO OPINION

Is therea need for more clarity as regardsthe scope of what
needs to be authorised (or not) in digital transmissions?

[The definition of the rights involved in digital transmissions]

TheEUframework for the protection of copyright and related
rights in the digital environment

is largely established by Directive 2001/29/EC16on
theharmonisationof certain aspects of copyright and related
rights in the information society. OtherEUdirectives in this
field that are

17

relevant in the online environmentare those relating to the
protection of software and databases18.

19

Directive 2001/29/EC harmonises the rights of authors and
neighbouring rightholders which are essential for the
transmission of digital copies of works (e.g. an e-book) and
other protected subject matter (e.g. a record in a MP3 format)
over the internet or similar digital networks.

The most relevant rights for digital transmissions are the
reproduction right, i.e. the right to

20

authorise or prohibit the making of copies , (notably relevant
at the start of the transmission - e.g. the uploading of a
digital copy of a work to a server in view of making it
available-and at the users' end-e.g. when a user downloads a
digital copy of a work) and the communication to the
public/making available right, i.e. the rights to authorise or
prohibit the dissemination of

21

the works in digital networks . These rights are intrinsically
linked in digital transmissions

and both need to be cleared.

The act of "making available"

Directive 2001/29/EC specifies neitherwhatis covered by the
making available right (e.g. the upload, the accessibility by
the public, the actual reception by the public) norwherethe act
of "making available" takes place. This does not raise questions
if the act islimited to a single territory. Questions arise
however when the transmission covers several territories and
rights need to be cleared (does the act of "making available"
happen in the country of the upload only? in each of the
countries wherethe content is potentially accessible? in each
of the countries where the content is effectively accessed?).
The most recent case law of the Court of Justice of the
European Union (CJEU) suggests that a relevant criterion is the
"targeting" of a certain 22

Member State's public.According to this approach the
copyright-relevant act (which has to be licensed) occurs at
least in those countries which are "targeted" by the online
service provider. A service provider "targets" a group of
customers residing ina specific country when it directs its
activity to that group, e.g. via advertisement, promotions, a
language or a currency specifically targeted at that group.

1.Is the scope of the"making available"right in cross-border
situations- i.e.when contentis disseminated across
borders-sufficiently clear?

!YES

!NO-Please explain how this could be clarified and what type of
clarification would be required (e.g. as in "targeting"
approach explained above, as in "country of origin"23

approach)

Basically I have no idea where the products exactly go, and by
whom they are consumed when they go across borders by internet.
Who is streaming music forexample, in what amount and why this
is possible. I think there should be a campaigne or something
like a brochure made for the creators to explain the basic
functions of the internet market as it is right now. And why it
is important to follow up on it.

!NO OPINION

1.[Inparticular if you are a right holder:]Could a clarification
of the territorial scopeof the "making available"right have an
effect on the recognition of your rights(e.g.whether you are
considered to be an author or not,whether you are considered to
have transferred your rights or not), on your remuneration,oron
the enforcement

of rights (including the availability of injunctiverelief24)?

!YES-Please explain how such potential effects could be
addressed

0NO

0NO OPINION

Two rights involved in a single act of exploitation

Each act of transmission in digital networks entails(in the
current state of technology and law) several reproductions.
This means that there are two rights that apply to digital
transmissions: the reproduction right and the making available
right. This may complicate the licensing of works for online
usenotably when the two rights are held by different
persons/entities.

1.[Inparticular if you a service provider or a right
holder:]Does the application of two rights to a single act of
economic exploitation in theonlineenvironment (e.g. a download)
create problems for you?

0YES-Please explain what type of measures would be needed in
order to address such problems (e.g. facilitation of joint
licences when the rights are in different hands, legislation to
achieve the "bundling of rights")

0NO

0NO OPINIONLinking and browsing

Hyperlinks are references to data that lead a user from one
location in the Internet to another. They are indispensable for
the functioning of the Internet as a network. Several cases are

25

pending before the CJEU in which the question has been raised
whether the provision of a clickable link constitutes an act of
communication to the public/making available to the public
subject to the authorisation of the rightholder.

A user browsing the internet (e.g. viewing a web-page) regularly
creates temporary copies of works and other subject-matter
protected under copyright on the screen and in the 'cache'

26

memory of his computer. A question has been referred to the CJEU
as to whether such copies are always covered by the mandatory
exception for temporary acts of reproduction provided for in
Article5(1)of Directive 2001/29/EC.

1.Should the provision of a hyperlinkleading to a work or other
subject matter protected under copyright, either in general or
under specific circumstances, be subject to the authorisation
of the rightholder?

0YES-Please explain whether you consider this to be the case in
general, or under specific circumstances, and why

0NO-Please explain whether you consider this to be the case in
general, or under specific circumstances, and why (e.g. because
it does not amount to an act of communication to the public -
orto a new public, or because it should be covered by a
copyright exception)

0NO OPINION

1. Should the viewing of a web-page where this implies the
temporary reproduction of a work or other subject matter
protected under copyright on the screen and in the cache memory
of the user's computer,either in general or under specific
circumstances,be subject to the authorisation of the
rightholder?

0YES-Please explain whether you consider this to be the case in
general, or underspecific circumstances, and why

Wenn jemand etwa originale Musikstücke auf einer Webseite
abspielt, dann sollte die Musik in diesem Moment und so lange
sie auf Rechnern abgerufen werden kann unter Copyright stehen.
Und der Autor der Kompositionensollte sich mit dem zur
Verfügung stellen seiner Werke bereit erklärt haben.

0NO-Please explain whether you consider this to be the case in
general, or under specific circumstances, and why (e.g. because
it is or should be coveredby a copyright exception)

0NO OPINION

Download to own digital content

Digital content is increasingly being bought via digital
transmission (e.g. download to own). Questions arise as to the
possibility for users to dispose of the files they buy in this
manner (e.g. by selling them or by giving them as a gift). The
principle ofEUexhaustion of the distribution right applies in
the case of the distribution of physical copies (e.g. when a
tangible article such as a CD or a book, etc. issold, the right
holder cannot prevent the further

27

distribution of that tangible article) . The issue that arises
here is whether this principle can also be applied in the case
of an act of transmission equivalent in its effect to
distribution

(i.e. where the buyer acquires the property of the copy).This
raises difficult questions, notably relating to the practical
application of such an approach (how to avoid
re-sellerskeepingand using a copy of a work after they have
"re-sold" it-this is often referred to as the "forward and
delete" question) as well as to the economic implications of
the creation of a second-hand market of copies of perfect
quality that never deteriorate (in contrast to the second-hand
market for physical goods).

1.[Inparticular if you are an end user/consumer:]Have you faced
restrictions when trying to resell digital files that you have
purchased(e.g.mp3 file,e-book)?

! YES - Please explain by givingexamples

!NO

!NO OPINION

1.[In particular if you are a right holder or a service
provider:] What would be the consequencesof providing a legal
framework enabling the resale of previously purchased digital
content? Please specify per market (type of content) concerned.

[Open question]

Registration of works and other subject matter-is it a good
idea?

Registration is not often discussed in copyright in theEUas the
existing international treaties in the area prohibit
formalities as a condition for the protection and exercise of
rights. However,

29

this prohibition is not absolute.Moreover a system
ofregistration does not need to be made compulsory or
constitute a precondition for the protection and exercise of
rights. With a longer term of protection and with the increased
opportunities that digital technology provides for the use of
content (including older works and works that otherwise would
not have been disseminated), the advantages and disadvantages
of a system of registration are increasingly

being considered30.

1.Would the creation of a registration system atEUlevel help in
the identification and licensing of works and other subject
matter?

!YES

! NO

0NO OPINION

1.What would be the possible advantages of such a system?

[Open question]

Wenn es einen Weg gibt, ein adäquates und funktionelles
europaweites System Erfassungssystem zu generieren, in dem
wirklich alle aktuellen Werke der Kreativen erfaßt werden
können. Das würde sicher helfen, um einen Gegenwert zu
erarbeiten. Wenn wir einmalwüßten, wer der Urheber welcher
Idee, welcher Werke ist und es eine riesige Suchmaschine gibt,
dann kann auch die Ausgabe vom Verbraucher bis zum Erzeuger
gelangen.

1.What would be the possible disadvantages of such a
system?[Open question]

1.What incentives for registration by rightholders could be
envisaged?

[Open question]

Wenn das System gut ist, zahlt es sich am Ende in barem Geld
aus. Das sollte derPrämienwertsein. Ein echtes, gutes und
effektives Suchsystem zwischen den Urhebern und ihren Kunden.

How to improve the use and interoperability of identifiers

There are many private databases of works and other subject
matter held by producers, collective management organisations,
and institutions such as libraries,which are based to a greater
or lesser extent on the use of (more or less) interoperable,
internationally agreed 'identifiers'. Identifiers can be
compared to a reference number embedded in a work, are

31

specific to the sector in which they have been developed , and
identify, variously, the work itself, the owner or the
contributor to a work or other subject matter. There are
notable examples of where industry is undertaking actions to
improve the interoperability of such

32

identifiers and databases. TheGlobal Repertoire Database should,
once operational, provide a single source of information on the
ownership and control of musical works worldwide. The

33

Linked Content Coalition was established to develop building
blocks for the expression and

managementof rights and licensing across all content and media
types. It includes the development of a Rights Reference Model
(RRM)-a comprehensive data model for all types

34

of rights in all types of content. The UK Copyright Hub is
seeking to take such identification systems a step further, and
to create a linked platform, enabling automated licensing across
different sectors.

1.What should be the role of theEUin promoting the adoption of
identifiers in the content sector,and in promoting the
developmentand interoperability of rights ownership and
permissions databases?

[Open question]

Term of protection-is it appropriate?

Works and other subject matter are protected under copyright for
alimited period of time. After the term of protection has
expired, a work falls into the public domain and can be freely
used by anyone (in accordance with the applicable national
rules on moral rights). The Berne35

Convention requires a minimum term of protection of50years after
the death of theauthor. TheEUrules extend this term of
protection to70years after the death of the author (as do many
other countries, e.g. the US).

With regard to performers in the music sector and phonogram
producers, the term provided for in the EU rules also extend 20
years beyond what is mandated in international agreements,
providing for a term of protection of70years after the first
publication. Performers and producers in the audio-visual
sector, however, do not benefit from such an extended term of
protection.

1.Are the current terms of copyright protectionstill appropriate
in the digital environment?

!YES-Please explain

!NO-Please explain if they should be longer or shorter

Es muß neue Überarbeitungen geben für das digitale Zeitalter.
Vor allem muß es deutlichere Kontrollmittel geben.

0NO OPINION

I.Limitations and exceptions in the Single Market

Limitations and exceptions to copyright and related rights
enable the use of works and other protected subject-matter,
without obtaining authorisation from the rightholders, for
certain purposes and to a certain extent (for instance the use
for illustration purposes of an extract from a novel by a
teacher in a literature class). At EU level they are
established in a number

36

of copyright directives, most notably Directive 2001/29/EC.

Exceptions andlimitations in the national andEUcopyright laws
have to respect international 37

law . In accordance with internationalobligations, the EU acquis
requires that limitations and exceptions can only be applied in
certain special cases which do not conflict with a normal
exploitation of the work or other subject matter and do not
unreasonably prejudice the legitimate interestof the
rightholders.

Whereas the catalogue of limitations and exceptions included
inEUlaw is exhaustive (no other

38

exceptions can be applied to the rights harmonised at EU level)
, these limitations and

39

exceptions are often optional , in the sensethat Member States
are free to reflect in national legislation as many or as few
of them as they wish. Moreover, the formulation of certain of
the limitations and exceptions is general enough to give
significant flexibility to the MemberStatesas to how,and to
what extent, to implement them (if they decide to do so).
Finally, it is worth noting that not all of the limitations and
exceptions included in theEUlegal framework for copyright are of
equivalent significance in policy terms and in terms of their
potential effect on the functioning oftheSingle Market.

In addition, in the same manner that the definition of the
rights is territorial (i.e. has an effect only within the
territory of the Member State),thedefinition of the
limitationsand exceptions to the rights is territorial too (so
an act that is covered by an exception in a Member State "A"
may

40

still require the authorisation of the rightholder once we move
to the Member State "B").

The cross-border effect of limitations and exceptions also
raises the question of fair compensation of rightholders. In
some instances, Member States are obliged to compensate
rightholders for the harm inflicted on them by a limitation or
exception to their rights. In other instances Member States are
not obliged, but may decide, to provide for such compensation.
If a limitation or exception triggering a mechanism of fair
compensation were to be givencross­bordereffect (e.g. the books
are used for illustration in an online course given by an
university in a Member State "A" and the students are in a
Member State "B") then there would also be a need to clarify
which national law should determine the level of that
compensation and who should pay it.

Finally, the question of flexibility and adaptability is being
raised: what is the best mechanism to ensure that theEUand
Member States' regulatory frameworks adapt when necessary
(either to clarify that certain uses are covered by an
exception or to confirm that for certain uses the authorisation
of rightholders is required)? The main question here is whether
a greater degree of flexibility can be introduced in theEUand
Member States regulatory framework while

ensuring the required legal certainty, including for the
functioning of the Single Market, andrespecting
theEU'sinternational obligations.

1.Arethere problems arising from the fact that most limitations
and exceptions provided in theEUcopyright directives are
optional for the Member States?

0YES-Please explain by referringto specific cases

0NO - Please explain

0NO OPINION

1.Should some/all of the exceptions be made mandatory and, if
so, is there a need for a higher level of harmonisation of such
exceptions?

0YES-Please explain by referringto specific cases

0NO - Please explain

0NO OPINION

1.Should any new limitations and exceptions be added to or
removed from the existing catalogue? Please explain by
referring to specific cases.

[Open question]

1.Independently from the questions above, is there a need to
provide for a greater degree of flexibility in theEUregulatory
framework for limitations and exceptions?

0YES-Please explain why

0NO-Please explain why

0NO OPINION

1.If yes,what would be the best approach to provide for
flexibility? (e.g. interpretation by national courts and the
ECJ, periodic revisions of the directives, interpretations by
the Commission,built-in flexibility,e.g. inthe form of a
fair-use or fair dealing provision/open norm, etc.)? Please
explain indicating what would be the relative advantages and
disadvantages of such an approach as well as its possible
effects onthefunctioning of the Internal Market.

[Open question]

1.Does the territoriality of limitations and exceptions,in your
experience,constitute a problem?

0YES-Please explain why and specify which exceptions you are
referring to

0NO - Please explain why and specify which exceptions you are
referring to

0NO OPINION

1. In the event that limitations and exceptions established at
national level were to havecross-border effect, how should the
question of"fair compensation"be addressed, when such
compensation is part of the exception?(e.g. whopays whom,
where?)

[Open question]

Access to content in libraries and archives

Directive 2001/29/ECenables MemberStatesto reflect in their
nationallaw a range of limitations and exceptions for the
benefit of publicly accessible libraries, educational
establishments and museums, as well as archives. If
implemented, these exceptions allow acts

41

of preservation and archiving and enable on-site consultation of
the works and other subject

42

matter in the collections of such institutions . The public
lending (under an exception or limitation) by these
establishments of physical copies of works and other subject
matter is

43

governed by the Rental andLending Directive .

Questions arise as to whether the current framework continues to
achieve the objectives envisaged or whether it needs to be
clarified or updated to cover use in digital networks. At the
same time, questions arise as to the effect of such a possible
expansion on the normal exploitation of works and other subject
matter and as to the prejudice this may cause to rightholders.
The role of licensing and possible framework agreements between
different stakeholders also needs to be consideredhere.

Preservation and archiving

The preservation of the copies of works or other subject-matter
held in the collections of cultural establishments (e.g. books,
records, or films)-the restoration or replacement of works, the
copying of fragile works - may involve the creation of another
copy/ies of these works or other subject matter. Most Member
States provide for an exception in their national laws allowing
for the making of such preservation copies. The scope of the
exception differs from Member State to Member State (as regards
the type of beneficiary establishments, the types of
works/subject-matter covered by the exception, the mode of
copying and the number of reproductions that a beneficiary
establishment may make). Also, the current legal status of new
types of preservation activities (e.g. harvesting and archiving
publicly available web content) is often uncertain.

1.(a)[In particular if you are an institutional user:]Have you
experienced specific problems when trying to usean exception to
preserve and archive specific works or other subject matter in
your collection?

(b)[In particular if you are a right holder:]Have you
experienced problems with the use by libraries,educational
establishments,museum or archives of the preservation
exception?

!YES-Please explain, by Member State, sector, and the type of
use in question.

!NO

!NO OPINION1.If thereareproblems,howwould they best be solved?

[Open question]

1.If your view is that a legislative solution is needed,what
would be its main elements? Which activities of the beneficiary
institutions should be covered and under which conditions?

[Open question]

1.If your view is that a differentsolution is needed, what would
it be?[Open question]

Off-premises access to library collections

Directive 2001/29/EC providesan exception for the consultation
of works and other subject- matter (consulting an e-book,
watching a documentary) via dedicated terminals on the premises
of such establishments for the purpose of research and private
study. The online consultation of works and other
subject-matter remotely (i.e. when the library user is not on
the premises of the library) requires authorisation and is
generally addressed in agreements between
universities/libraries and publishers. Some argue that the law
rather than agreements should provide for the possibilityto,and
the conditions for, granting online access to collections.

1.(a)[In particular if you are an institutional user:]Have you
experienced specific problems when trying to negotiate
agreements with rights holders that enable you to provide
remote access, including across borders, to your collections
(or parts thereof) for purposes of research and private study?

[In particular if you are an end user/consumer:]Have you
experienced specific problems when trying to consult, including
across borders, works and other subject-matter held in the
collections of institutions such as universities and national
libraries when you are not on the premises of the institutions
in question?

[In particular if you are aright holder:]Have you negotiated
agreements with institutional users that enable those
institutions to provide remote access, including across
borders, to the works or other subject-matter in their
collections, for purposes of research and private study?

[Open question]

1.If there are problems,howwould they best be solved?[Open
question]

1. If your view is that a legislative solution is needed, what
would be its main elements? Which activities of the beneficiary
institutions should be coveredand under which conditions?

[Open question]

1.If your view is that a different solution is needed, what
would it be?[Open question]

E-lending

Traditionally, public libraries have loaned physical copies of
works (i.e. books, sometimes also CDs and DVDs) to their users.
Recent technological developments have made it technically
possible for libraries to provide users with temporary access
to digital content, such as e-books, music or films via
networks. Under the current legal framework, libraries need to
obtain the authorisation of the rights holders to organise such
e-lending activities. In various Member States, publishers and
libraries are currently experimenting with different business
models for the making available of works online, including
direct supply of e-books to libraries by publishers or bundling
by aggregators.

1.(a)[In particular if you are a library:]Have you experienced
specificproblems when trying to negotiate agreements to enable
the electronic lending (e-lending), including across borders,
of books or other materials held in your collection?

[In particular if you are an end user/consumer:]Have you
experienced specific problems when trying to borrow books or
other materials electronically (e-lending), including across
borders, from institutions such as public libraries?

[In particular if you are a right holder:]Have you negotiated
agreements with libraries to enablethem to lend books or other
materials electronically, including across borders?

0YES-Please explain with specific examples

!NO

!NO OPINION

1.If there are problems,how would they best be solved?[Open
question]

The following two questions are relevant both to this point
(n°3)and the previous one (n°2).

1.[In particular if you are an institutional user:]What
differences do you see in the management of physical and online
collections,including providing access to your subscribers? What
problems have you encountered?

[Open question]

1.[In particular if you are a right holder:]What difference do
you see between libraries' traditional activities such as
on-premises consultation or public lending and activities such
as off-premises (online, at a distance) consultation
ande­lending?What problems have you encountered?

[Open question]

Mass digitisation

The term "mass digitisation"is normally used to refer to efforts
by institutions such as libraries and archives to digitise (e.g.
scan) the entire content or part of their collections with an
objective to preserve these collections and, normally, to make
them available to the public. Examples are

efforts by libraries to digitise novels form the early part of
the 20thcentury or whole collections of pictures of historical
value. This matter has been partly addressed at theEUlevel by
the2011Memorandum of Understanding(MoU) on key principles on
the digitisation and making available of out of commerce works
(i.e. works which are no longer found in the normal channels of
commerce), which is aiming to facilitate mass digitisation
efforts (for books and learned journals) on the basis of
licence agreements between libraries and similar cultural
institutions on the one hand and the collecting societies
representing authors and publishers on

the other.Provided the required funding is ensured (digitisation
projects are extremely expensive), the result of this MoU should
be that books that are currently to be found only in the
archives of, for instance, libraries will be digitised and made
available online to everyone.The MoU is based on voluntary
licences (granted by Collective Management Organisations on the
basis of the mandates they receive from authors and publishers).
Some Member States may need to enact legislation to ensure the
largest possible effect of such licences (e.g. by establishing
in legislation a presumption of representation of a collecting
society or the

recognition of an "extended effect" to the licences granted)45.

1.[In particular if you are aninstitutional user, engaging or
wanting to engage in massdigitisation projects, a right holder,
a collective management organisation:]Would it be necessary in
your country to enact legislation to ensure that the results of
the2011MoU(i.e.the agreements concluded between libraries and
collecting societies) have a cross-border effect so that out of
commerce works can be accessed across theEU?

0YES - Please explain why and how it could best be achieved

0NO-Please explain

0NO OPINION

1.Would it be necessary to develop mechanisms, beyond those
already agreed for other types of content (e.g. for audio- or
audio-visual collections,broadcasters' archives)?

0YES-Please explain

0NO-Please explain

0NO OPINION

Teaching

Directive 2001/29/EC enables Member States to implement in their
national legislationlimitations and exceptions forthe purpose of
illustration for non-commercial teaching. Such exceptions would
typically allow a teacher to use parts of or full works to
illustrate his course, e.g. by distributing copies of fragments
of a book or of newspaper articles in the classroom or by
showing protected content on a smart board without having to
obtain authorisation from the right holders. The open
formulation of this (optional) provision allows for rather
different implementation at Member States level. The
implementation of the exception differs from Member State to
Member State, with several Member States providing instead a
framework for the licensing of content for certain educational
uses. Some argue that the law should provide for better
possibilities for distance learning andstudy at home.

1.(a)[In particular if you are an end user/consumer or an
institutional user:]Have you experienced specific problems when
trying to use works or other subject-matter for illustration for
teaching, including across borders?

(b)[In particular if you are a right holder:]Have you
experienced specific problems resulting from the way in which
works or other subject-matter are used for illustration for
teaching,including across borders?

!YES-Please explain

!NO

!NO OPINION

1.If there are problems,howwould they best be solved?[Open
question]

1. What mechanisms exist in the market place to facilitate the
use of content for illustration for teaching purposes? How
successful are they?

[Open question]

1.If your view is that a legislative solution is needed,what
would be its main elements?

Which activities of the beneficiary institutions should be
covered and under what conditions?

[Open question]

1.If your view is that a different solution is needed, what
would it be?[Open question]

Research

47

Directive 2001/29/EC enables Member States to choose whether to
implement in their national laws alimitation for the purpose of
non-commercial scientific research. The open formulation of this
(optional) provision allows for rather different implementations
at Member States level.

1.(a)[In particular if you are an end user/consumer or an
institutional user:]Have you experienced specificproblems when
trying to use works or other subject matter in the context of
research projects/activities, including across borders?

(b)[In particular if you are a right holder:]Have you
experienced specific problems resulting from the way in which
worksor other subject-matter are used in the context of
research projects/activities, including across borders?

!YES-Please explain

0NO

!NO OPINION

1.If there are problems, how would they best be solved?[Open
question]

1.What mechanisms exist in the Member States to facilitate the
use of content for research purposes? How successful are they?

[Open question]

Disabilities

48

Directive 2001/29/EC providesfor an exception/limitation for the
benefit of people with a disability. The open formulation of
this (optional) provision allows for rather different
implementations at Member States level. AtEUand international
level projectshave been launched to increase the accessibility
of works and other subject-matter for persons with disabilities
(notably by increasing the number of works published in special
formats and

49

facilitating their distribution across the European Union) .

The Marrakesh Treaty50has been adopted to facilitate access to
published works for persons who are blind, visually impaired,
or otherwise print disabled. The Treaty creates a mandatory
exception to copyright that allows organisations for the blind
to produce, distribute and make available accessible format
copies to visually impaired persons without the authorisation
of the rightholders. TheEUand its Member States have started
work to sign and ratify the Treaty. This may require the
adoption of certain provisions atEUlevel (e.g. to ensure the
possibility to exchange accessible format copies across
borders).

1.(a)[In particular if you are a person with a disability or an
organisation representingpersons with disabilities:]Have you
experienced problemswith accessibility to content,including
across borders, arising from Member States' implementation of
this exception?

[In particular if you are an organisation providing services for
persons with disabilities:]Have you experienced problems when
distributing/communicating works published in special formats
across theEU?

[In particular if you are a right holder:]Have you experienced
specific problems resulting from the application of limitations
or exceptions allowing for the distribution/communication of
works published in special formats, including across borders?

0YES-Please explain by giving examples

0NO

0NO OPINION

1.If there are problems, what could be done to improve
accessibility?[Open question]

1.What mechanisms exist in the market place to facilitate
accessibility to content? How successful are they?

[Open question]

Text and data mining

Text and data mining/content mining/data analytics51are
different terms used to describe increasingly important
techniques used in particular by researchers for the
exploration of vast amounts of existing texts and data (e.g.,
journals, web sites, databases etc.). Through the use of
software or other automated processes, an analysis is made of
relevant texts and data in order to obtain new insights,
patterns and trends.

The texts and data used for mining are either freely accessible
on the internet or accessible through subscriptions to e.g.
journals and periodicals that give access to the databases of
publishers. A copy is made of the relevant texts and data (e.g.
on browser cache memories or in computers RAM memories or onto
the hard disk of a computer), prior to the actual analysis.
Normally, it is considered that to mine protected works or
other subject matter, it is necessary to obtain authorisation
from the right holders for the making of such copies unless
such authorisation can be implied (e.g. content accessible to
general public without restrictions on the internet, open
access).

Some argue that the copies required for text and data mining are
covered by the exception for temporary copies in Article5.1of
Directive 2001/29/EC. Others consider that text and data mining
activities should not even be seen as covered by copyright. None
of this is clear, in particular since text and data mining does
not consist only of a single method, but can be undertaken in
several different ways. Important questions also remain as to
whether the main problems arising in relation to this issue go
beyond copyright (i.e. beyond the necessity or not to obtain
the authorisation to use content) and relate rather to the need
to obtain "access" to content (i.e. being able to use e.g.
commercial databases).

A specific Working Group wasset up on this issue in the
framework of the "Licences for Europe" stakeholder dialogue. No
consensus was reached among participating stakeholders on either
the problems to be addressed or the results. At the same time,
practical solutions to facilitate text and data mining of
subscription-based scientific content were presented by

52

publishers as an outcome of "Licences for Europe".In the context
of these discussions, other stakeholders argued that no
additional licences should be required to mine material to
which access has been provided through a subscription agreement
and considered that a specific

exceptionfor text and data mining should be introduced, possibly
on the basis of a distinction between commercial and
non-commercial.

1.(a)[In particular if you are an end user/consumer or an
institutional user:]Have you experienced obstacles, linked to
copyright, when trying to use text or dataminingmethods,
including across borders?

[In particular if you are a service provider:]Have you
experienced obstacles, linked to copyright,whenproviding
services based on text or data mining methods, including across
borders?

[In particular if you are a right holder:]Have you experienced
specific problems resulting from the use of text and data
mining in relation to copyright protected content, including
across borders?

0YES-Please explain

0NO-Please explain

0NO OPINION

1.If there are problems,howwould they best be solved?[Open
question]

1. If your view is that a legislative solution is needed, what
would be its main elements? Which activities should be covered
and under what conditions?

[Open question]

1.If your view is that a different solution is needed, what
would it be?[Open question]

1.Are thereother issues, unrelated to copyright, that constitute
barriers to the use of text ordatamining methods?

[Open question]

User-generated content

Technological and service developmentsmean that citizens can
copy, use and distribute content at little to no financial
cost. As a consequence, new types of online activities are
developing rapidly, including the making of so-called
"user-generated content". While users can create totally
original content, they can also take one or several
pre-existing works, change something

53

in the work(s), and upload the result on the Internet e.g. to
platforms andblogs.User­generatedcontent (UGC) can thus
coverthe modification of pre-existing works even if the
newly-generated/"uploaded" work does not necessarily require a
creative effort and results from merely adding, subtracting or
associating some pre-existing content with other pre­existing
content. This kind of activity is not "new" as such. However,
the development of social networking and social media sites
that enable users to share content widely has vastly changed
the scale of such activities and increased the potential
economic impact for those holding rights in the pre-existing
works. Re-use is no longer the preserve of a technically and
artistically adept elite. With the possibilities offered by the
new technologies, re-use is open to all, at no cost. This in
turn raises questions with regard to fundamental rights such
the freedom of expression and the right to property.

A specific Working Group was set up on this issue in the
framework of the "Licences forEurope"stakeholder dialogue. No
consensus was reached among participating stakeholders on
either the problems to be addressed or the results or even the
definition of UGC. Nevertheless, a wide range of views were
presented as to the best way to respond to this phenomenon. One
view was to say that a new exception is needed to cover UGC, in
particular non-commercial activities by individuals such as
combining existing musical works with videos, sequences of
photos, etc. Another view was that no legislative change is
needed: UGC is flourishing, and licensing schemes are
increasingly available(licenceschemes concluded between
rightholders and platforms as well as micro-licences concluded
between rightholders and the users generating the content. In
any event, practical solutions to ease user-generated content
and facilitate micro-licensing for small users were pledged by
rightholders across different sectors

as a result of the "Licences for Europe" discussions54.

1.(a)[In particular if you are an end user/consumer:]Have you
experienced problemswhen trying to use pre-existing works or
other subject matter to disseminate new content on
theInternet,including across borders?

(b)[In particular if you are a service provider:]Have you
experienced problems when users publish/disseminate new
contentbased on the pre-existing works or other subject-matter
through your service, including across borders?

(c)[In particular if you are a right holder:]Have you
experienced problems resulting from

the way the users are using pre-existing works or other
subject-matter to disseminate new content on the Internet,
including across borders?

0YES-Please explain by giving examples

0NO

0NO OPINION

1.(a)[In particular if you arean end user/consumer or a right
holder:]Have you experienced problems when trying to ensure
that the work you have created (on the basis of pre-existing
works) is properly identified for online use? Are proprietary
systems sufficient in this context?

(b)[In particular if you are a service provider:]Do you provide
possibilities for users that are publishing/disseminating the
works they have created (on the basis of pre-existing works)
through your service to properly identify these works for
online use?

0YES-Please explain

Ich habeinDeutschland Schwierigkeiten mit demArtsysSystem der
GVL. Es sind noch lange nicht alle Werke, Erscheinungen online
gesammelt, um eine korrekte Ausschüttung sicher zu stellen.
Seit der Umstellungauf den Onlineservice ist die Verwaltung der
Datenmengen nicht bewältigt worden.

0NO-Please explain

0NO OPINION

1.(a)[In particular if you are an end user/consumer or a right
holder):]Have you experienced problems when trying to be
remunerated forthe use of the work you have created (on the
basis of pre-existing works)?

(b)[In particular if you are a service provider:]Do you provide
remunerationschemes for users publishing/disseminating the
works they have created (on the basis of pre-existing works)
through your service?

!YES-Please explain

Wie oben beschrieben. Dadurch, daßes scheinbar sehr lange
dauert, alle Werke eines Urhebers zu erfassen, gibt es Probleme
mit der Entlohnung. Ich denke, die Urheber sollten sich selber
auf den entsprechenden Plattformen verwalten können.

!NO-Please explain

!NO OPINION

1.If thereareproblems,howwould they best be solved?

[Open question]

Ich denke, die Urheber sollten sich selber auf den
entsprechenden Plattformen verwaltenkönnen.Oderwenigstensin
dieVerwaltungsprozesse miteingreifen
dürfen.SodaßdieKontrollmöglichkeitgegeben ist.

1.If your view is that a legislative solution is needed, what
would be its main elements? Which activities should be covered
and under what conditions?

[Open question]

1.If your view is that a different solution is needed, what
would it be?

[Open question]

Meiner Meinung nach ist es wirklich schwierig und eine enorme
Arbeit, allekünstlerisch erschaffenden Tätigkeitenso
digitalzusammenzutragen, daßmanIhre Bewegungen im Netz, die
Aktivitäten der Endabnehmer, alle kommerziellen Bewegungen
überhaupt verfolgen kann.

Wenn es eine Art digitale Flatrate gibt, und wir sind
bereitsmittendrin. Kanäle wir youtube, spotify, simfy bieten
Inhalte entweder kostenlos oder für einen monatlichen Beitrag.
Dann muß es am Ende auch eine Art der Versorgung fürdie
Künstler geben.

Man muß als Urheber erfaßt werden können, in verschiedenen
Kategorien und dann an einer Art Ausschüttung teilhaben. Was
nicht geht ist, daß es Unternehmen gibt, die an den Inhalten

sehr viel verdienen, die sie selbst nicht erstellen und die
Gegenwerte nicht angemessen weiterleiten.

I.Private copyingand reprography

Directive 2001/29/EC enables Member States to implement in their
national legislation exceptions or limitations to the
reproductionright for copies made for private use and

photocopying55. Levies are charges imposed at national level on
goods typically used for such purposes (blank media, recording
equipment, photocopying machines, mobile listening devices such
as mp3/mp4 players, computers, etc.) with a view to compensating
rightholders for the harm they suffer when copies are made
without their authorisation by certain categories of persons
(i.e. natural persons making copies for their private use) or
through use of certain technique (i.e. reprography). In that
context, levies are important for rightholders.

With the constant developments in digital technology, the
question arises as to whether the copying of files by
consumers/end-users who have purchased content online-e.g.
whena person has bought an MP3 file and goes on to store
multiple copies of that file (in her computer, her tablet and
her mobile phone) - also triggers, or should trigger, the
application of private copying levies. It is argued that, in
some cases, these levies may indeed be claimed by rightholders
whether or not the licence fee paid by the service provider
already covers copies made by the end user. This approach could
potentially lead to instances of double payments

5657

whereby levies could be claimed on top of service providers'
licence fees.

There is also an on-going discussion as to the application or
not of levies to certain types of cloud-based services such as
personal lockers or personal video recorders.

1.In your view, is therea need to clarify at theEUlevel the
scope and application of

58

the private copying and reprography exceptions in the digital
environment?0YES-Please explain

Im privaten Rahmen kommt einiges an Rechten zusammen, die
niemals auftauchen. Es sollteGesetze und Anweisungen geben,
nach denen die Menschen sich richten können. Es soll durch
Richtlinien auch ein Bewußtsein geschaffen werden für den
Kreativbereich.

0NO-Please explain

0NO OPINION

I. Should digital copies madeby end users for private purposes
in the context of a service that has been licensed by
rightholders, and where the harm to the

rightholder is minimal,be subject to private copying levies?59

YES-Please explain

!NO-Please explain

Wobei die Frage bleibt: was ist minimal? Wenn sehr viele private
Endnutzer digitale Kopien nutzen, kommt auch etwas zusammen.

!NO OPINION

1.Howwould changes in levies withrespect to the application to
online services (e.g. services based on cloud computing
allowing, for instance,users to have copies on different
devices) impact the development and functioning of new business
models on the one hand and rightholders' revenue on the other?

[Open question]

1. Would you see an added value in making levies visible on the
invoices for products subject to levies?60!YES-Please explain

!NO-Please explain

!NO OPINION

Diverging national systemslevy different products and apply
different tariffs. This results in obstacles to the free
circulation of goods andservicesin the Single Market. At the
same time, many MemberStatescontinue to allow the
indiscriminate application of private copying levies

to all transactions irrespective of the person to whom the
product subject to a levy is sold (e.g. private person or
business). In that context, not all Member States have ex ante
exemption and/ or ex post reimbursement schemes which could
remedy thesesituations and reduce the number

of undue payments61.

1.Have you experienced a situation where a cross-border
transaction resulted in undue levy payments,orduplicate
payments of the same levy,orother obstacles to the freemovement
of goods or services?

!YES-Please specify the type of transaction and indicate the
percentage of the undue payments. Please also indicate how a
priori exemption and/or ex post reimbursement schemes could
help to remedy the situation.

!NO-Please explain

Ich habe auch nicht viel Erfahrung.

!NO OPINION

1.What percentage of products subject to a levy is sold to
persons other than natural persons for purposes clearly
unrelated to private copying? Do any of those
transactionsresult in undue payments? Please explain in detail
the example you provide (type of products, type of transaction,
stakeholders, etc.).

[Open question]

1.Where such undue payments arise,what percentage of trade do
theyaffect? To what extent could a priori exemptions and/or ex
post reimbursement schemes existing in some Member States help
to remedy the situation?

[Open question]

1.If you have identified specificproblems with the current
functioning of the levy system, how would these problems best
be solved?

[Open question]

I.Fair remuneration of authors and performers

TheEUcopyright acquis recognises for authors and performers a
number of exclusive rights and, in the case of performers whose
performances are fixed in phonograms, remuneration rights. There
are few provisions in the EU copyright law governing
thetransferof rights from

62

authors or performers to producers or determining who the owner
of the rights is when the

63

work or other subject matter is created in the context of an
employment contract . This is an area that has been
traditionally left for Member Statesto regulate and there are
significant differences in regulatory approaches. Substantial
differences also exist between different sectors of the
creative industries.

Concerns continue to be raised that authors and performers are
not adequately remunerated,in particular but not solely, as
regards online exploitation. Many consider that the economic
benefit of new forms of exploitation is not being fairly shared
along the whole value chain. Another commonly raised issue
concerns contractual practices, negotiation mechanisms,
presumptions of transfer of rights, buy-out clauses and the
lack of possibility to terminate contracts. Some stakeholders
are of the opinion that rules at national level do not suffice
to improve their situation and that action at EU level is
necessary.

1.[In particular if you are an author/performer:] What is the
best mechanism (or combination of mechanisms) to ensure that
you receive an adequate remuneration for the exploitation of
your works and performances?

[Open question]

Ich denke,dieEinrichtungen,diewir schon haben, wie etwa die
Interessenverbände der Urheber sollten von Zeit zu Zeit
überprüft werden. Sie müßten besser vernetzt werden. Sie
brauchen noch effektivere Suchmaschinen. Meiner Meinung nach
ist das ein wichtiger Schlüssel für die Zukunft, das schnelle
Finden von Sachverhalten.

Oder es sollte sogar eine europaweite Kontrolleinrichtung geben.
Denn die Gelder der Künstler fließen oft über die Grenzen und
Institutionen hinweg und gehen u.U. auf verschiedenen Wegen
auch verloren.

1.Is therea need to act at theEUlevel (for instance to prohibit
certain clauses in contracts)?

0YES-Please explain

Es würde bestimmte Dinge einfacher gestalten, wenn es eine EU
weite Verabredung gäbe.

!NO-Please explain why

!NO OPINION

1.If you consider that the current rules are not effective,what
would you suggest to address the shortcomings you identify?

[Open question]

I.Respect for rights

64

Directive 2004/48/EE providesfor a harmonised framework for the
civil enforcement of intellectual property rights, including
copyright and related rights. The Commission has

consulted broadly on this text65. Concerns have been raised as
to whether some of its provisions are still fitto ensure a
proper respect for copyright in the digital age. On the one
hand, the current measures seem to be insufficient to deal with
the new challenges brought by the dissemination of digital
content on the internet; on the other hand, there are concerns
about the current balance between enforcement of copyright and
the protection of fundamental rights, in particular the right
for a private life and data protection. While it cannot be
contested that enforcement measures should always be available
in case of infringement of copyright, measures could be
proposed to strengthen respect for copyright when the infringed
content is

used for a commercial purpose66. One means to do this could be
to clarify the role of

67

intermediaries in the IP infrastructure .At the same time, there
could be clarification of the safeguards for respect of private
life and data protection for private users.

1.Should thecivil enforcement system in theEUbe rendered more
efficient for infringements of copyright committed with
acommercial purpose?

! YES - Please explain

! NO - Please explain

!NO OPINION

1.Inparticular,is the current legal framework clear enough to
allow for sufficient involvement of intermediaries (such
asInternetservice providers, advertisingbrokers, payment
service providers, domain name registrars, etc.) in inhibiting
online copyright infringements with a commercial purpose? If
not,what measures would be useful to foster the cooperation of
intermediaries?

[Open question]

1.Does the current civil enforcement framework ensure that the
right balance is achieved between the right to have one's
copyright respected and other rights such as the protection of
private life and protection of personal data?

!YES-Please explain

!NO-Please explain

!NO OPINION

I.A singleEUCopyright Title

The idea of establishing a unifiedEUCopyright Title has been
presentin the copyright debate for quite some time now,
although views as to the merits and the feasibility of such an
objective are divided. A unifiedEUCopyright Title would totally
harmonise the area of copyright law in the EU and replace
national laws. There would then be a single EU title instead of
a bundle of national rights. Some see this as the only manner in
which a truly Single Market for content protected by copyright
can be ensured, while others believe that the same objective
can better be achievedby establishing a higher level
ofharmonisationwhile allowing for a certain degree of
flexibility and specificity in Member States' legal systems.

1.Should theEUpursue the establishment of a singleEUCopyright
Title,as a means of establishing a consistent framework for
rights and exceptions to copyright across theEU,as well as a
single framework for enforcement?

!YES

! NO

0NO OPINION

1.Should this be the next step in the development of copyright
in theEU?Does the current level of differenceamong the Member
State legislation mean that this is a longer term project?

[Open question]

I.Other issues

The above questionnaire aims to provide a comprehensive
consultation on the most important matters relating to the
currentEUlegal framework for copyright. Should any important
matters have been omitted, we would appreciate if you could
bring them to our attention, so they can be properly addressed
inthefuture.

1.Are thereany other important matters related to theEUlegal
framework for copyright? Please explain and indicate how such
matters should be addressed.

[Open question]

16

Access to content in libraries and archives19

