


Public Consultation

on the review of the EU copyright rules

Contents

I.  Introduction  2

A.  Context of the consultation  2

B.  How to submit replies to this questionnaire  3

C.  Confidentiality  3

II.  Rights and the functioning of the Single Market  7

A.  Why is it not possible to access many online content
services from anywhere in Europe?  7

B.  Is there a need for more clarity as regards the scope of
what needs to be authorised (or not) in digital transmissions?
10

1.  The act of “making available”  10

2.  Two rights involved in asingle act of exploitation  11

3.  Linking and browsing  12

4.  Download to own digital content  13

C.  Registration of works and other subject matter – is it a
good idea?  14

D.  How to improve the use and interoperability of identifiers
15

E.  Term of protection – is it appropriate?  15

III.  Limitations and exceptions in the Single Market  16

A.  Access to content in libraries and archives  19

1.  Preservation and archiving  19

2.  Off-premises access to library collections  20

3.  E – lending  21

4.  Mass digitisation  22

B.  Teaching  23

C.  Research  25

D.  Disabilities  25

E.  Text and data mining  27

F.  User-generated content  28

IV.  Private copying and reprography  31

V.  Fair remuneration of authors and performers  33

VI.  Respect for rights  34

VII.  A single EU Copyright Title  36

VIII.  Other issues  36

Introduction

Contextof the consultation

Over the last two decades, digital technology and the Internet
have reshaped the ways in which content is created,
distributed, and accessed. New opportunities have materialised
for those that create and produce content (e.g. a film, anovel,
a song), for new and existing distribution platforms, for
institutions such as libraries, for activities such as research
and for citizens who now expect to be able to access content –
for information, education or entertainment purposes –
regardless of geographical borders.

This new environment also presents challenges. One of them is
for the market to continue to adapt to new forms of
distribution and use. Another one is for the legislator to
ensure that the system of rights, limitations to rights and
enforcement remains appropriate and is adapted to the new
environment. This consultation focuses on the second of these
challenges: ensuring that the EU copyright regulatory framework
stays fit for purpose in the digital environment to support
creation and innovation, tap the full potential of the Single
Market, foster growth and investment in our economy and promote
cultural diversity.

In its "Communication on Content in the Digital Single Market"1

COM (2012)789 final, 18/12/2012.

the Commission set out two parallel tracks of action:on the one
hand, to complete its on-going effort to review and to
modernise the EU copyright legislative framework2

As announced in the Intellectual Property Strategy ' A single
market for Intellectual Property Rights: COM (2011)287 final,
24/05/2011.

3

"Based on market studies and impact assessment and legal
drafting work"as announced in the Communication (2012)789.

with a view to a decision in 2014 on whether to table
legislative reform proposals, andon the other,to facilitate
practical industry-led solutions through the stakeholder
dialogue "Licences for Europe" on issues on which rapid
progress was deemed necessary and possible.

The "Licences for Europe"process has been finalised now4

See the document “Licences for Europe – tem pledges to bring
more content
online”:http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/copyright/docs/licences-for-europe/131113_ten-pledges_en.pdf.

. The Commission welcomes the practical solutions stakeholders
have put forward in this context and will monitor their
progress. Pledges have been made by stakeholders in all four
Working Groups (cross border portability of services,
user-generated content, audiovisual and film heritage and text
and data mining). Taken together, the Commission expects these
pledges to be a further step in making the user environment
easier in many different situations. The Commission also takes
note of the fact that two groups – user-generated content and
text and data mining – did not reach consensus among
participating stakeholders on either the problems to be
addressed or on the results. The discussions and results of
"Licences for Europe" will be also taken into account in the
context of the review of the legislative framework.

As part of the review process, the Commission is now launching a
public consultation on issues identified in the Communication on
Content in the Digital Single Market, i.e.:"territoriality in
the Internal Market, harmonisation, limitations and exceptions
to copyright in the digital age; fragmentation of the EU
copyright market; and how to improve the effectiveness and
efficiency of enforcement while underpinning its legitimacy in
the wider context of copyright reform". As highlighted in the
October 2013 European CouncilConclusions5

EUCO 169/13, 24/25 October 2013.

"Providing digital services and content across the single market
requires the establishment of a copyright regime for the digital
age. The Commission will therefore complete its on-going review
of the EU copyright framework in spring 2014. It is important
to modernise Europe's copyright regime and facilitate
licensing, while ensuring a high level protection of
intellectual property rights and taking into account cultural
diversity".

This consultation builds on previous consultations and public
hearings, in particular those on the "Green Paper on copyright
in the knowledge economy"6

COM(2008)
466/3,http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/copyright/copyright-infso/index_en.htm#maincontentSec2.

, the "Green Paper onthe online distribution of audiovisual
works"7

COM(2011) 427
final,http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/consultations/2011/audiovisual_en.htm.

and "Content Online"8

http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/consultations/2009/content_online_en.htm.

. These consultations provided valuable feedback from
stakeholders on a number of questions, on issues as diverse as
the territoriality of copyright and possible ways to overcome
territoriality, exceptions related to the online dissemination
of knowledge, and rightholders’ remuneration, particularly in
the audiovisual sector. Views were expressed by stakeholders
representing all stages in the value chain, including right
holders, distributors, consumers, and academics. The questions
elicited widely diverging views on the best way to proceed. The
"Green Paper on Copyright in the Knowledge Economy" was followed
up by a Communication. The replies to the "Green Paper on the
online distribution of audiovisual works" have fed into
subsequent discussions on the Collective Rights Management
Directive and into the current review process.

How to submit replies to this questionnaire

You are kindly asked to send your repliesby 5 February 2014in a
MS Word, PDF or OpenDocument format to the following e-mail
address of DG Internal Market and
Services:markt-copyright-consultation@ec.europa.eu. Please note
that replies sent after that date will not be taken into
account.

This consultation is addressed to different categories of
stakeholders. To the extent possible, the questions indicate
the category/ies of respondents most likely to be concerned by
them (annotation in brackets, before the actual question).
Respondents should nevertheless feel free to reply to any/all
of the questions. Also, please note that, apart from the
question concerning the identification of the respondent, none
of the questions is obligatory. Replies containing answers only
to part of the questions will be also accepted.

You are requested to provide your answers directly within this
consultation document. For the “Yes/No/No opinion” questions
please put the selected answer inboldandunderlineit so it is
easy for us to see your selection.

In your answers to the questions, you are invited to refer to
the situation in EU Member States.You are also invited in
particular to indicate, where relevant, what would be the
impact of options you put forward in terms of costs,
opportunities and revenues.

The public consultation is available in English. Responses may,
however, be sent in any of the 24 official languages of the EU.

Confidentiality

The contributions received in this round of consultation as well
as a summary report presenting the responses in a statistical
and aggregated form will be published on the website of DG
MARKT.

Please note that all contributions received will be published
together with the identity of the contributor, unless the
contributor objects to the publication of their personal data
on the grounds that such publication would harm his or her
legitimate interests. In this case, the contribution will be
published in anonymous form upon the contributor's explicit
request. Otherwise the contribution will not be published nor
will its content be reflected in the summary report.

Pleaseread ourPrivacy statement.

Please identify yourself:

Name:

Verband für Deutschlands Video- und Computerspieler e.V. (VDVC)

NGO, Germany, represented by Patrik Schönfeldt

In the interests of transparency, organisations (including, for
example, NGOs, trade associationsand commercial enterprises)
are invited to provide the public with relevant information
about themselves by registering in the Interest Representative
Register and subscribing to its Code of Conduct.

If you are a Registered organisation, please indicate your
Register ID number below. Your contribution will then be
considered as representing the views of your organisation.

380437512816-28

If your organisation is not registered, you have the opportunity
toregister now. Responses from organisations not registered will
be published separately.

If you would like to submit your reply on an anonymous basis
please indicate it belowby underlining the following answer:

Yes, I would like to submit my reply on an anonymous basis

Type of respondent(Pleaseunderlinethe appropriate):

End user/consumer(e.g. internet user, reader, subscriber to
music or audiovisual service, researcher, student)
ORRepresentative of end users/consumers

for the purposes of this questionnaire normally referred to
in questions as"endusers/consumers"

Institutional user(e.g. school, university, research centre,
library, archive) OR Representative of institutional users

for the purposes of this questionnaire normally referred to
in questions as"institutional users"

Author/Performer OR Representative of authors/performers

Publisher/Producer/Broadcaster OR Representative of
publishers/producers/broadcasters

the two above categoriesare,for the purposes of this
questionnaire, normally referred to in questions as"right
holders"

Intermediary/Distributor/Other service provider(e.g. online
music or audiovisual service, games platform, social media,
search engine, ICT industry)OR Representative of
intermediaries/distributors/other service providers

for the purposes of this questionnaire normally referred to
in questions as"service providers"

Collective Management Organisation

Public authority

Member State

Other(Please explain):

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Rights and the functioning of the Single Market

Why isit not possible to access many online content services
from anywhere in Europe?[The territorial scope of the rights
involved in digital transmissions and the segmentation of the
market through licensing agreements]

Holders of copyright and related rights – e.g. writers, singers,
musicians - do not enjoy a single protection in the EU. Instead,
they are protected on the basis of a bundle of national rights
in each Member State. Those rights have been largely harmonised
by the existing EU Directives. However, differences remain and
the geographical scope of the rights is limited to the
territory of the Member State granting them. Copyright is thus
territorial in the sense that rights are acquired and enforced
on a country-by-country basis under national law9

This principle has been confirmed by the Court of justice on
several occasions.

.

The dissemination of copyright-protected content on the Internet
– e.g. by a music streaming service, or by an online e-book
seller – therefore requires, in principle, anauthorisation for
each national territory in which the content is communicated to
the public. Rightholders are, of course, in a position to grant
a multi-territorial or pan-European licence, such that content
services can be provided in several Member States and across
borders. A number of steps have been taken at EU level to
facilitate multi-territorial licences: the proposal for a
Directive on Collective Rights Management10

Proposal for a Directive of the European Parliament and of the
Council of 11 July2012 on collective management of copyright
and related rights and multi-territorial licensing of rights in
musical works for online uses in the internal market, COM(2012)
372 final.

should significantly facilitate the delivery of
multi-territorial licences in musical works for online
services11

Collective Management Organisations play a significant role in
the management of online rights for musical works in contrast
to the situation where online rights are licensed directly by
right holders such as filmor record producers or by newspaper
or book publishers.

; the structured stakeholder dialogue “Licences for Europe”12

You can find more information on the following website:
http://ec.europa.eu/licences-for-europe-dialogue/.

and market-led developments such as the on-going work in the
Linked Content Coalition13

You can find more information on the following
website:http://www.linkedcontentcoalition.org/.

.

"Licences for Europe" addressed in particular the specific issue
of cross-border portability, i.e. the ability of consumers
having subscribed to online services in their Member State to
keep accessing them when travelling temporarilyto other Member
States. As a result, representatives of the audio-visual sector
issued a joint statement affirming their commitment to continue
working towards the further development of cross-border
portability14

See the document “Licences for Europe – tem pledges to bring
more content
online”:http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/copyright/docs/licences-for-europe/131113_ten-pledges_en.pdf.

.

Despite progress, there are continued problems with the
cross-border provision of, and access to, services. These
problems are most obvious to consumers wanting to access
services that are made available in Member States other than
the one in which they live. Not all online services are
available in all Member States and consumers face problems when
trying to access such services across borders. In some
instances, even if the “same” service is available in all
Member States, consumers cannot access the service across
borders (they can only access their “national” service, and if
they try to access the "same" service in another Member State
they are redirected to the one designated for their country of
residence).

This situation may in part stem from the territoriality of
rights and difficulties associated with the clearing of rights
in different territories. Contractual clauses in licensing
agreements between right holders and distributors and/or
between distributors and end users may also be at the origin of
some of the problems (denial of access, redirection).

The main issue at stake here is, therefore, whether further
measures (legislative or non-legislative, including market-led
solutions) need to be taken at EU level in the medium term15

For possible long term measures such as the establishment of a
European Copyright Code (establishing a single title) see
section VII of this consultation document.

to increase the cross-border availability of content services in
the Single Market, while ensuring an adequate level of
protection for right holders.

[In particular if you are an end user/consumer:]Have you faced
problems when trying to access online services in an EU Member
State other than the one in which you live?

YES: Eine Umfrage (>1800 Teilnehmer) im Umfeld unseres
Verbands hat ergeben, dass über 3/4 der an Videospielen ohne
Jugendfreigabeinteressieren Personen bereits Probleme dieser
Art hatten. Teilweise wird sogar die (Online-) Nutzung von (auf
DVD) importierten Videospieltiteln geblockt. Im Folgenden einige
von unseren Mitgliedern geschilderte Probleme:

Beispiel A: (TV-/Online-Serien)

TV-Serien (auch US-Serien, die bspw. durch Netflix lizensiert
werden) können teilweise nicht aus Deutschland angesehen
werden. Ein Abonnement aus einem anderen europäischen Land als
dem jeweiligen Operationsland aus ist nicht möglich. Die
Kulturgüter sindoft nur für einzelne Länder im europäischen
Wirtschaftsraum lizensiert. Dies widerspricht eindeutig der
europäischen Idee des freien Waren- und
Dienstleistungsangebotes.

Beispiel B: (Spiele bzw. deren Online-Vertrieb)

Eine Umfrage (>1800 Teilnehmer) imUmfeld unseres Verbands hat
ergeben, dass über 3/4 der an Videospielen ohne Jugendfreigabe
interessieren Personen bereits Probleme dieser Art bei
digitalen Spielen bzw. in deren Online-Vertrieb hatten.
Teilweise wird sogar die (Online-) Nutzung von (auf DVD)
importierten Titeln geblockt:

Aufgrund des Jugendschutzes in Deutschland sind viele Spiele
indiziert (Verbot der Werbung, Ausstellungsverbot) - dies kommt
einer staatlichen Zensur gleich, da Händler die Titel nicht
umsatzdeckend im Inland an Erwachseneverkaufen können (vorrätig
halten), weil durch das Werbeverbot kaum kein Kunde von dem
neuen Titel erfährt. Der Staat selbst zensiert zwar nicht, die
Hersteller werden zu Schnitten animiert, da sonst dem Titel die
Verwehrung einer Freigabe droht. Auch Fachzeitschriften
berichten nicht über solche Titel (indiziert, ab18), da sie
juristische Forderungen fürchten müssen. Ein Versand an
Erwachsene aus dem EU-Ausland gestaltet sich schwierig, da der
Zoll solche Lieferungen beschlagnahmt, bis das Alter
vollständig nachgewiesen ist. Erwachsene dürfen jedoch den
Inhalt erwerben, besitzen und konsumieren - da der Zweck dem
Jugendschutz und (idealerweise) nicht der Zensur
dient.Folge:Viele Anbieter von Videospielen erstellen jedoch
aus Schutz vor eventuellen juristischen Folgen eine generelle
Aktivierungssperre ("Region Lock") für die Aktivierung/das
Herunterladen des Spiels für ganz Deutschland. Sowohl
Jugendliche als auch Erwachsene Käufer können so den erworbenen
Inhalt nicht nutzen. Dies stellt eine Benachteiligung deutscher
Käufer dar und hindert sie an der Ausübung ihres Nutzungsrechts
für Waren welche in der EU erworben wurden. Für Deutschland
werden oft eigens angepasste Versionen erstellt, um der
Indizierung und damit dem Ausstellungs- und
Werbeverbothierzulande zu entgehen. Einige Sperren erlauben
daher zwar die Aktivierung, jedoch nicht die Nutzung zusammen
mit anderen, europäischen Käufern der nicht zensierten Version
(Online-Sperre, sodass nur deutsche Nutzer miteinander spielen
können). Rein rechtlich ist den deutschen Volljährigen
gestattet alle nicht beschlagnahmten Spiele zu erwerben, nur
sind die Hürden so hoch, dass ein adäquates (von der KJM
anerkanntes) Altersverifikationssystem für einen Anbieter
horrende Kosten verursacht und auch mit anderen Bestimmungen
nicht vereinbar ist (bei einigen Systemen ist die Herausgabe
von persönlichen Online-Banking Zugangsdaten gefordert).
Beispielsweise sind die Kosten für ein eID System mit dem neuen
Personalausweis mit ca 70.000€ pro Jahr zu teuer für die
meistenOnline-Shops und das System eignet sich daher eher nur
für Banken, Versicherungen und staatliche Stellen. Ein Impuls
für die Wirtschaft ist es nicht. Die von den
Online-Distributoren und Entwicklern eingesetzten DRM-Systeme
verhindern zudem bereits das Kaufen im Ausland und das Handeln
mit Spielen und Inhalten über die Grenzen Deutschlands heraus.
Somit möchten die Anbieter hauptsächlich eine regionale
Preispolitik auch innerhalb der EU umsetzen (keine freier
Käuferentscheidung), zum anderen wollen sie sich vor Forderung
im Zusammenhang mit dem strengen Jugendschutzgesetz absichern.
Deutschen Nutzern ist es also auch auf dem Weg des
Schenken-Lassens von Freunden im EU Ausland nicht möglich,
Spiele zu kaufen oder zu Nutzen. Es gibt sogar bereits Fälle
von NACHTRÄGLICHER Verhinderung der Nutzung bereits aktivierter
Spiele falls das Spiel nicht im eigenen nationalen
Wirtschaftsraum erworben wurde (Steam Plattform der Valve
Corporation, Bellevue, WA, USA). Viele Distributoren haben
keinen deutschen Sitz, der Nutzer kann im Zweifel selten klagen
– außerdem behalten sich die Firmen vor, bei Klagen, die
Nutzungsrechte des Kunden teilweise oder ganz einzuschränken
und können dies technisch durch die DRM Systeme auch ohne
Weiteres durchsetzen. Die Durchsetzung von Kundenrechten
bezüglich Rückgabe und Weiterverkauf, freier Warenerwerb
innerhalb der EU sind daher nachhaltig eingeschränkt.

Beispiel C: (Musikindustrie)

Rechteverwertungsgesellschaften in Deutschland (z.B. GEMA)
verlangen sehr hohe Tantiemen von Online-Diensten für das
Anbieten von Inhalten von Rechteinhaber - oft auch für
(private) Interpreten für die sie nur einen "angenommenen"
Vertretungsanspruch haben, also auch ohne Wissen und Wunsch der
Rechteinhaber. Sie halten immer noch krampfhaft an
überkommenen,traditionellen Vertriebsformen für digitale
Unterhaltungsinhalte fest. Das führt dazu, dass hierzulande
Nutzer vor Länderschranken betroffen sind - teilweise auch
trotz der Tatsache, dass die/der InterpretIn ihre Werke
eigentlich zur freien Verfügung freigegeben haben. Für
Auftritte, bei denen sie eigens komponierte Musikstücke spielen
(also keine Rechte Dritter verletzen), müssen sie an die GEMA
Abgaben entrichten, die diese jedoch nicht an sie zurückgibt,
wenn sie nicht als Mitglied der GEMA geführt werden. Die
(Online-)Dienste können und wollen diese Summen (z.B. 10cent
pro angenommen "Klick" aus Deutschland) nicht zahlen und
verwehren daher deutschen Nutzern das Ansehen dieser Stücke. In
jüngsten Gerichtsurteilen ließ sich die GEMA bestätigen, dass
sie nicht für die Sperren verantwortlich zeige, sondern dass
sie lediglich 8 Titel beanstandet, die jedoch stellvertretend
für alle Medien auf der Plattform mit Musik stehen.
Letztendlich hätten aber Youtube und Co. bei einer potentiellen
Einigung auch für „massenhafte Rechtsverletzungen“ rückwirkend
für alle Titel zahlen müssen und nicht nur für die 8
"Beispielstücke". Insofern sind die umfassenden Sperren als
Selbstschutz zu verstehen. Dass der Gegner im andauernden
Rechtsstreit genannt wird (sinngemäß: „tut uns leid, die GEMA
hat die Verlagsrechte nicht eingeräumt, daher sehen Sie dieses
Video nicht“) ist daher im Kern richtig.

Es gibt sogar Vorstöße von Rechteverwertern, das Verlinken oder
Einbetten von Videos, Filmen, Musik und Bildern abgabepflichtig
zu machen. Damit würde das Grundkonzept des freien Internets
ausgehebelt und man könnte nicht ruhigen Gewissens mehr Links
folgen odersetzen ohne sich vor gerichtlichen Forderungen zu
fürchten. In Deutschland gilt zudem, dass man für Links
haftbar gemacht werden kann, wenn der Inhalt dahinter
rechtswidrig ist. Jedoch hat man u.U. keine Möglichkeit,
geänderte Inhalte hinter einem Link zu erkennen oder zu
beeinflussen. Ein Blogbetreiber wurde beispielsweise bereits
verklagt, weil er eine Bildquelle nicht richtigangegeben hatte.
Dabei war die Bildquelle auf der HTML Seite richtig angegeben,
nur der Direktlink zeigte keine Quelle auf, was auch technisch
ohne Änderungen des ursprünglichen Bildes gar nicht möglich
ist. Das Ändern des Bildes beispielsweise mit einer
Quellenangabe als Wasserzeichen ist aber wiederum selbst
rechtswidrige Verwendung und Veränderung eines Werkes. Als
Nutzer kann man also keinerlei Rezensionen oder Diskussionen
vornehmen, ohne in irgendeiner Art in die Haftung genommen zu
werden und finanziell durch multimillionen-Euro-Konzerne und
Gesellschaften ausgenutzt zu werden.

Beispiel D: (Filmwirtschaft)

Filme und Spiele, die bspw. in Italien als Kunst erfahren und
auch so angesehen werden (Horrorfilme, Erotik, Ego-Shooter)
werden in Deutschland massiv zensiert, um überhaupt eine
Verkaufsfreigabe zu bekommen. Die Abgabe von
Erwachseneninhalten, obwohl sie schon nur für Erwachsene sind,
werden derart reglementiert, dass nicht einmal für Erwachsene,
die für sich selbst die Unterhaltung aussuchen dürften,
ungeschnittener (Film‑)Genuss möglich ist. Sogar oft als 100%
ungeschnitten beworbene Fassungen weisen gravierende Zensuren
und Schnitte auf, die dem Publisher vom deutschen Staat
abgenötigt werden - und das alles, obwohl Zensur laut dem
Grundgesetz nicht stattfindet. Dabei geht es nicht um
strafrechtlich relevante Inhalte: Strafrechtliche und
verfassungsfeindliche Inhalte (Verherrlichung des 3. Reiches,
Kinderpornographie, Snuff, etc.) müssen unzweifelhaft aus dem
Verkehr gezogen werden, aber der Jugendschutz darf nicht als
Argument herhalten um Konsumenten von "nicht normativer Kunst"
zu kriminalisieren. Wenn also die Abgabe an Kinder und
Jugendliche ausgeschlossen ist, sollte Erwachsenen nicht nur
rein rechtlich sondern auch tatsächlich der Erwerb (auch aus
dem Ausland) möglich sein.

 NO

 NO OPINION

[In particular if you are a service provider:]Have you faced
problems when seeking to provide online services across borders
in the EU?

 YES - Please explain whether such problems, in your
experience,are related to copyright or to other issues (e.g.
business decisions relating to the cost of providing services
across borders, compliance with other laws such as consumer
protection)? Please provide examples indicating the Member
State, the sector and the type of content concerned (e.g.
premium content such as certain films and TV series,
audio-visual content in general, music, e-books, magazines,
journals and newspapers, games, applications and other
software).

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO

NO OPINION

[In particular if you are a right holder or a collective
management organisation:]How often are you asked to grant
multi-territorial licences? Please indicate, if possible, the
number of requests per year and provide examples indicating the
Member State, the sector and the type of content concerned.

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

If you have identified problems in the answers to any of the
questions above – what would be the best way to tackle them?

[Open question]

Die genannten Lösungen der Problematik sind nicht auf Vorstöße
der Kommission beschränkt:

-Einführung günstiger Altersverifikationssysteme mithilfe von
elektronischenAusweisen (Obergrenzen für Preise zur
Bereitstellung von eID-Systemen - damit die Nutzung nicht nur
Banken und Behörden zugute kommt, sondern auch kleinen
Wirtschaftsunternehmungen).

-Strenge Sanktion der Abgabe von Erwachseneninhalten an Kinder
und Jugendliche.

-Europäische Verwertungsgesellschaften (schaffen und) über
nationale stellen. Nationale Gesellschaften langfristig
abschaffen.

-Die Praxis abschaffen, wonach Verwertungsgesellschaften ein
"Vertretungsanspruch" unabhängig von der tatsächlichen
Vertretung ihrer Rechteinhaber ausführen - sie sollen nur
vertreten, was sie auch wirklich unter Vertrag haben.

-Deckelung der Verwertungsentgelte für Privatpersonen oder
alternativ Einführung einer "Kulturflatrate"die abhängig vom
Einkommen der Bürger ist und den Genuss von frei verfügbarer
Unterhaltung [(Web-)Radio, freiem Fernsehen und freien
Internetdiensten] ermöglicht, wobei der Entgeltungsanspruch
erlischt. Die Einnahmen der Kulturflatrate anhand von
Schlüsseln/Nutzungsquoten verteilen, die nicht durch ein
Gremium aus Medienvertretern, Nutzerverbänden und Politik
festgelegt wird (Euro-GEZ).

-Ländersperren ("IP-Blocks") von EU-Ländern bei Angeboten aus
der EU und an EU gerichtete Bürger verbieten. "Freizügigkeit
der digitalen Dienstleistung der EU".

-FairUse-Vorbild aus den USA in der EU noch liberaler
umsetzen."Culture is based on remix and everybody should be
allowed to remix!"

-Euro-PostIdent System einführen, das Lieferung von
Erwachseneninhalten auch überGrenzen ermöglicht [online über
eID und Lesegerät über ein OpenID-System ohne personenbezogene
Daten (Age-Gate, Altersfreigabemitteilung), im realen
Warenverkehr über altersverifizierbare Sendungen]. Mit diesem
System das Aktivieren von Erwachsenentiteln (Spielen) aus jedem
EU-Land heraus ermöglichen.

-Computerspiele und Filme EU-weit als Kunst anerkennen. Auch
wenn nicht jedes Spiel und jeder Film wertvoll ist, so sind sie
doch geschaffene Kunst - immerhin gibt es auch in Literatur und
Malerei viel Gutes und viel Schund. (Neue Medien werden von
althergebrachten Medien wie Fernsehen und Printmedien als
kulturell wenig wertvoll und gefährlich dargestellt, wie einst
die Romane von Goethe durch das damalige Establishment)

-Für digitale Güter die Besteuerung imKundenland einführen.
Steam (Downloadplattform der Firma Valve Corporation mit Sitz
in Luxembourg) zahlt für alle Käufe auf der Plattform z.B. nur
12% MwSt. in LUX und der Anbieter hat keinen Anreiz, auf
deutsche Kundenansprüche einzugehen, weil er hier keine
Mehrwertsteuer abführen muss - der Staat hat auch kein
gesteigertes Interesse daran, deutsche Verbraucherinteressen
durchzusetzen (zum Beispiel das Einführen einer
Altersverifikation für volljährige Deutsche zum Erwerb
ungeschnittener Spiele), wenn dieValve Corporation hierzulande
keine Steuern zahlt.

-nicht zulassen, dass der Erwerb digitaler Waren auf nationale
Ebene beschränkt wird. Valve verbietet auch teilweise im Namen
der Spieleanbieter in Steam das freie Versenden von Gütern
(Spielegeschenken)innerhalb von EU-Ländergrenzen, da sie
nationale Wirtschaftsräume schaffen wollen, sodass Kunden nicht
von günstigeren Preisen in anderen (EU-)Ländern profitieren
können.

[In particular if you are a right holder or a collective
management organisation:]Are there reasons why, even in cases
where you hold all the necessary rights for all the territories
in question, you would still find it necessary or justified to
impose territorial restrictions on a service provider (in
order, for instance, to ensure thataccess to certain content is
not possible in certain European countries)?

 YES – Please explain by giving examples

NO

Dies ergäbe für Kulturgüter, Kunst und Unterhaltungsmedien
keinerlei Sinn. Entgegenstehende Prinzipien wie bspw.
Jugendschutzmaßnahmen sollten an Alter und nicht an
Nationalstaatenzugehörigkeit gekoppelt sein. Alles andere läuft
dem europäischen Gedanken zuwider.

Hieraus lässt sich jedoch keine Pflicht ableiten, die eigene
Seite/den Dienst in allen europäischen Sprachen anbieten zu
müssen.

 NO OPINION

[In particular if you are e.g. a broadcaster or a service
provider:]Are there reasons why, even in cases where you have
acquired all the necessary rights for all the territories in
question, you would still find it necessary or justified to
impose territorial restrictions on the service recipient (in
order for instance, to redirect the consumer to a different
website than the one he is trying to access)?

 YES – Please explain by giving examples

NO

Nutzer sollten in der EU die Waren- und Dienstleistungsfreiheit
nicht aufgrund ihrer Nationalität einbüßen müssen. Anders
gelagerte Ausnahmen wären geschützte Inhalte bspw. für
Jugendliche, die nach Alter gefiltert werden sollten (keine
Diskriminierung aufgrund des Herkunftslandes).

 NO OPINION

Do you think that further measures (legislative or
non-legislative, including market-led solutions) are needed at
EU level to increase the cross-border availability of content
services in the Single Market, while ensuring an adequate level
of protection for right holders?

YES– Please explain

Insbesondere im Bereich, in dem (deutscher) Jugendschutz die
private Mediennutzung Erwachsener reguliert, besteht momentan
ein Verfügbarkeitsdefizit für volljährige Nutzer. Insbesondere
sind teilweise deutsche Versionen nicht mit in anderen Ländern
verfügbaren Versionen kompatibel und eignen sichnicht für
grenzübergreifende (Online-)Nutzung mit mehreren Klienten.

Die Kommission sollte die Einteilung von Verkaufs- und
Dienstleistungsplattformen in unterschiedliche Länderbereiche
untersagen.

 NO – Please explain

 NO OPINION

Is there a need for more clarity as regards the scope of what
needs to be authorised (or not) in digital transmissions?[The
definition of the rights involved in digital transmissions]

The EU framework for the protection of copyright and related
rights in the digitalenvironment is largely established by
Directive 2001/29/EC16

Directive 2001/29/EC of the European Parliament and of the
Council of 22 May 2001 on the harmonisation of certain aspects
of copyright and related rights in the information society.

on the harmonisation of certain aspects of copyright and related
rights in the information society. OtherEU directives in this
field that are relevant in the online environment are those
relating to the protection of software17

Directive 2009/24/EC of the EuropeanParliament and of the
Council of 23 April 2009 on the legal protection of computer
programs.

and databases18

Directive 96/9/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council
of 11 March 1996 on the legal protection of databases.

.

Directive 2001/29/ECharmonises the rights of authors and
neighbouring rightholders19

Film and record producers, performers and broadcasters are
holders of so-called “neighbouring rights” in, respectively,
their films, records, performances and broadcast. Authors’
content protected by copyright is referred to as a “work” or
“works”, while content protected by neighbouring rights is
referred to as “other subject matter”.

which are essential for the transmission of digital copies of
works (e.g. an e-book) and other protected subjectmatter (e.g.
a record in a MP3 format) over the internet or similar digital
networks.

The most relevant rights for digital transmissions are the
reproduction right, i.e. the right to authorise or prohibit the
making of copies20

The right to “authorise or prohibit direct or indirect,
temporary or permanent reproduction by any means and in any
form, in whole or in part” (see Art. 2 of Directive 2001/29/EC)
although temporary acts of reproduction of a transient or
incidental nature are, under certain conditions, excluded (see
art. 5(1) of Directive 2001/29/EC).

, (notably relevant at the start of the transmission – e.g. the
uploading of a digital copy of a work to a server in view of
making it available – and at the users’ end – e.g. when a user
downloads a digital copy of a work) and the communication to
the public/making available right, i.e. the rights to authorise
or prohibit thedissemination of the works in digital networks21

The right to authorise or prohibit any communication to the
public by wire orwireless means and to authorise or prohibit
the making available to the public “on demand” (see Art. 3 of
Directive 2001/29/EC).

. These rights are intrinsically linked in digital transmissions
and both need to be cleared.

The act of “making available”

Directive 2001/29/EC specifies neitherwhatis covered by the
making available right (e.g. the upload, the accessibility by
the public, the actual reception by the public) norwherethe act
of “making available” takes place. This does not raise questions
ifthe act is limited to a single territory. Questions arise
however when the transmission covers several territories and
rights need to be cleared (does the act of "making available"
happen in the country of the upload only? in each of the
countries where the content is potentially accessible? in each
of the countries where the content is effectively accessed?).
The most recent case law of the Court of Justice of the
European Union (CJEU) suggests that a relevant criterion is the
“targeting” of a certain Member State's public22

See in particular Case C-173/11 (Football Dataco vs Sportradar)
and Case C-5/11 (Donner) for copyright and related rights, and
Case C-324/09 (L’Oréal vs eBay) for trademarks. With regard to
jurisdiction see also joined Cases C-585/08 and C-144/09
(Pammer and Hotel Alpenhof) and pending CaseC-441/13 (Pez
Hejduk); see however, adopting a different approach, Case
C-170/12 (Pinckney vs KDG Mediatech).

. According to this approach the copyright-relevant act (which
has to be licensed) occurs at least in those countries which
are “targeted” by the online service provider. A service
provider “targets” a group of customers residing in a specific
country when it directs its activity to that group, e.g. via
advertisement, promotions, a language or a currency
specifically targeted at that group.

Is the scope of the “making available” right in cross-border
situations – i.e. when content is disseminated across borders –
sufficiently clear?

 YES

NO – Please explain how this could be clarified andwhat type
of clarification would be required (e.g. as in "targeting"
approach explained above, as in "country of origin" approach23

The objective of implementing a “country of origin” approach is
to localise the copyright relevant act that must be licenced in
a single Member State (the "country of origin", which could be
for example the Member State in which the content is uploaded
or where the service provider is established), regardless of in
how many Member States the work can be accessed or received.
Such an approach has already been introduced at EU level with
regard to broadcasting by satellite (see Directive 93/83/EEC on
the coordination of certain rules concerning copyright and
rights related to copyright applicable to satellite
broadcasting and cable retransmission).

)

Insbesondere bei der Nutzung von bereits (z.B. auf Datenträger)
erworbenen Inhalten ist unklar, ob eine Freischaltung des
Mediums mittels DRM ein Zugänglichmachen bedeutet oder ob der
Inhalt bereits beim Kauf zugänglich gemacht wurde und in
welchem Land diese Aktivierung (einer ausländischen
Softwareversion) nun tatsächlich stattzufinden hat.

Beim Kauf von regional unterschiedlichen Versionen von Waren
sollte klargestellt werden, dass die Nutzer die Möglichkeit
haben, aus diesen aufgrund des freien Waren- und
Dienstleistungsverkehrs zu wählen.

NO OPINION

[In particular if you are a right holder:]Could a clarification
of the territorial scope of the “making available” right have
an effect on the recognition of your rights (e.g.whether you
are considered to be an author or not, whether you are
considered to have transferred your rights or not), on your
remuneration, or on the enforcement of rights (including the
availability of injunctive relief24

Injunctive relief is a temporary orpermanent remedy allowing the
right holder to stop or prevent an infringement of his/her
right.

)?

 YES – Please explain how such potential effects could be
addressed

 NO

NO OPINION

Two rights involved in a single act of exploitation

Each act of transmission in digital networks entails (in the
current state of technology and law) several reproductions.
This means that there are two rights that apply to digital
transmissions: the reproduction right and the making available
right. This may complicate thelicensing of works for online use
notably when the two rights are held by different
persons/entities.

[In particular if you a service provider or a right holder:]Does
the application of two rights to a single act of economic
exploitation in the online environment (e.g. a download) create
problems for you?

YES – Please explain what type of measures would be needed in
order to address such problems (e.g. facilitation of joint
licences when the rights are in different hands, legislation to
achieve the "bundling of rights")

Erwachsene Endnutzer sollen prinzipiell jede Art von Medien (die
hierzulande nicht gerichtlich beschlagnahmt worden ist) erwerben
können. Die Erwerbshürden sind jedoch so hoch, dass kaum ein
(europäischer) Verkäufer diese Erwerbshürdenüberkommen kann,
wodurch der Erwerb aus dem deutschen Inland heraus für viele
Güter nicht möglich ist (vor allem digitale Güter) und so der
freie Warenverkehr künstlich erschwert oder sogar unmöglich
gemacht wird. Hier ist eine Vermittlung und Abwägung zwischen
den Mitgliedstaaten notwendig, ob Jugendschutzbedenken oder
andere Sonderregelungen den Warenverkehr unverhältnismäßig
einschränken können und ob nicht gemeinsame Standards zu
erreichen sind.

 NO

 NO OPINION

Linking and browsing

Hyperlinks are references to data that lead a user from one
location in the Internet to another. They are indispensable for
the functioning of the Internet as a network. Several cases are
pending before the CJEU25

Cases C-466/12 (Svensson), C-348/13 (Bestwater International)
and C-279/13 (C More entertainment).

in which the question has been raised whether the provision of
a clickable link constitutes an act of communication to the
public/making available to the public subject to the
authorisation ofthe rightholder.

A user browsing the internet (e.g. viewing a web-page) regularly
creates temporary copies of works and other subject-matter
protected under copyright on the screen and in the 'cache'
memory of his computer. A question has been referred tothe
CJEU26

Case C-360/13 (Public Relations Consultants Association Ltd).
See
alsohttp://www.supremecourt.gov.uk/decided-cases/docs/UKSC_2011_0202_PressSummary.pdf.

as to whether suchcopies are always covered by the mandatory
exception for temporary acts of reproduction provided for in
Article 5(1) of Directive 2001/29/EC.

Should the provision of a hyperlink leading to a work or other
subject matter protected under copyright, either in general or
under specific circumstances, be subject to the authorisation
of the rightholder?

 YES – Please explain whether you consider this to be the
case in general, or under specific circumstances, and why

NO – Pleaseexplain whether you consider this to be the case
in general, or under specific circumstances, and why (e.g.
because it does not amount to an act of communication to the
public – or to a new public, or because it should be covered by
a copyright exception)

Das Bereitstellen des Werkes benötigt die Erlaubnis des
Rechteinhabers. Für den Verweis auf ein bereits öffentlich
verfügbares Werk sollte unter keinen Umständen erneute
Erlaubnis eingeholt werden müssen. Der Verlinkende kann u.U. im
Einzelfall die Rechtmäßigkeit der Bereitstellung nicht erkennen.
Der Inhalt hinter einem Link kann sich ebenfalls jederzeit ohne
sein Wissen ändern.

NO OPINION

Should the viewing of a web-page where this implies the
temporary reproduction of a work or other subjectmatter
protected under copyright on the screen and in the cache memory
of the user’s computer, either in general or under specific
circumstances, be subject to the authorisation of the
rightholder?

 YES – Please explain whether you consider this to be the
case in general, or under specific circumstances, and why

NO – Please explain whether you consider this to be the case
in general, or under specific circumstances, and why (e.g.
because it is or should be covered by a copyright exception)

Anhand einesLinks lässt sich nicht auf den Inhalt einer Seite
schließen. Der Aufrufende kann nie sofort erkennen, was sich
hinter einem Link verbirgt. Wenn nun das Betrachten nur mit
Erlaubnis gestattet sein sollte, würde das eine enorme
Rechtsunsicherheit für den Nutzer bedeuten, der entsprechend
keine Links zu unbekannten Seiten mehr aufrufen dürfte.

Streaming: Beim Streamen wird keine Kopie erzeugt, die man ohne
den Stream nutzen könnte. Die Nutzer kaufen die gestreamten
Inhalte später auf Trägermedien, wenn sie den Inhalt dauerhaft
nutzen wollen.

 NO OPINION

Download to own digital content

Digital content is increasingly being bought via digital
transmission (e.g. download to own). Questions arise as to the
possibility for users to dispose of the files they buy in this
manner (e.g. by selling them or by giving them as a gift). The
principle of EU exhaustion of the distribution right applies in
the case of the distribution of physical copies (e.g. when a
tangible article such as a CD or a book, etc. is sold, the
right holder cannot prevent the furtherdistribution of that
tangible article)27

See also recital 28 of Directive 2001/29/EC.

. The issue that arises here is whether this principle can also
be applied in the case of an act of transmission equivalent in
its effect to distribution (i.e. where the buyer acquires the
property of the copy)28

In Case C-128/11 (Oracle vs. UsedSoft) the CJEU ruled that an
author cannot oppose the resale of a second-hand licence that
allows downloading his computer program from his website and
using it for an unlimited period of time. The exclusive right
ofdistribution of a copy of a computer program covered by such
a licence is exhausted on its first sale. While it is thus
admitted that the distribution right may be subject to
exhaustion in case of computer programs offered for download
with the right holder’s consent, the Court was careful to
emphasise that it reached this decision based on the Computer
Programs Directive. It was stressed that this exhaustion rule
constituted alex specialisin relation to the Information
Society Directive (UsedSoft, par.51, 56).

. This raises difficult questions, notably relating to the
practical application of such an approach (how to avoid
re-sellers keeping and using a copy of a work after they have
“re-sold” it – this is often referred to as the “forward and
delete”question) as well as to the economic implications of the
creation of a second-hand market of copies of perfect quality
that never deteriorate (in contrast to the second-hand market
for physical goods).

[In particular if you are an end user/consumer:]Haveyou faced
restrictions when trying to resell digital files that you have
purchased (e.g. mp3 file, e-book)?

YES – Please explain by giving examples

1) Bei Videospielen wird der Weiterverkauf in der Regel durch
Accountbindung des Inhaltes (z.B. Steam, Origin) technisch
unterbunden. Der Inhalt bzw. dessen Nutzungsrecht ist dauerhaft
mit dem Käufer verbunden, eine Weitergabe meist in
Geschäftsbedingungen untersagt. Accountbindung von digitalem
Inhalt (Filme, Spiele, etc.) verhindert effektiv das
Weiterverkaufen nach der Nutzung. Wird der Account
weitergegeben drohen Sperren, die den Inhalt unbenutzbar
machen.

2) DRM (Digital Rights Management) verhindert oft das Nutzen von
erworbenen Medien auf verschiedenen Geräten im eigenen Haushalt.
Zur Nutzung in unterschiedlichen Räumen und mobil bspw.im Kfz
muss der Kunde neue DRM-fähige Hardware erwerben, die dies
unterstützt, wobei meist die Anzahl der Gerät, die
(gleichzeitig) unterstützt werden, limitiert ist. Teilweise
wird die Anzahl der Installationen begrenzt sodass nach
mehrmaligem Systemwechsel die Nutzung vollständig unmöglich
gemacht wird.

Unser Standpunkt: Auch wenn nur ein Nutzungsrecht für digitalen
Inhalt erworben wurde, muss dieses Nutzungsrecht "Lizenz"
weiter veräußerbar bleiben - wenn natürlich sichergestellt ist,
den Inhalt nicht mehr selbst weiter nutzen zu können. Die
Accountbindung von Spielen, Filmen, und Musik, etc. sollte
derart gestaltet werden, dass das Nutzungsrecht auf andere
Konten übertragen werden kann, dazu sollte der Anbieter den
Weiterverkauf auf der jeweiligen Plattform ermöglichen
(beispielsweise über einen Gebrauchtmarkthandelohne überzogene
Gebühren). Die Rechteinhaber versuchen derzeit, jeden Nutzer
einzeln zur Kasse zu bitten, auch wenn andere Nutzer ihr
Nutzungsrecht nicht mehr wahrnehmen wollen und es anderen zur
Verfügung stellen möchten. So wird ein Gebrauchtmarkt effektiv
verhindert. Derzeit kauft man ein Nutzungsrecht auf Zeit, dass
nicht weiter veräußerbar, vererbbar und teilweise bei
Passwortverlust nicht weiter verwendbar ist. Jede Person in
einem Haushalt zahlt so zusätzlich, da Weitergabe von Accounts
meistens ebenfalls untersagt ist.

NO

NO OPINION

[In particular if you are a right holder or a service provider:]
What would be the consequences of providing a legal framework
enabling the resale of previously purchased digital content?
Please specify per market (type of content) concerned.

[Open question]

[Alle Märkte mit Nutzungsrechten für digitale Medien] DRM o.ä.
Systeme müssten den Weiterverkauf durch dieÜbertragung der
Nutzungsrechte auf den Käufer ermöglichen (Übertragung der
Accountbindung auf einen anderen Account). Dies wäre die
Analogie zum Weiterverkauf herkömmlicher Waren. Die bisherige
Nutzung von DRM hatte vor allem zur Folge, die Anzahl der
Erstverkäufe durch den Anbieter künstlich zu erhöhen, da jeder
Nutzer einen Kauf direkt beim ursprünglichen Anbieter zum
Vollpreis vornehmen muss.

Im Bereich Videospiele könnte die Schaffung eines rechtlichen
Rahmens für den Wiederverkauf digitaler Inhalte einen legalen
Markt schaffen, wo bisher nur illegale Angebote existieren. So
muss bisher für die Nutzung nicht mehr erhältlicher Inhalte oft
in eine rechtliche Grauzone (oder weiter) ausgewichen werden,
sodass auch Nutzer, die in der Regel nach Recht und Gesetz
handeln, mindestens indirekt den illegalen (Schwarz-) Markt
unterstützen. Dies betrifft insbesondere die Verfügbarkeit von
Umgehungsmöglichkeiten von technischen Kopierschutzmaßnahmen.
Diese Umgehungsmaßnahmen werden bisher (auch) für den
Gebrauchthandel benötigt.

Die Möglichkeiten von DRM bieten in diesem Fall den Vorteil,
dass eine Weiternutzung durch den Verkäufer nicht mehr möglich
ist. Der Weiterverkauf muss europaweit möglichgemacht werden,
wobei regional unterschiedliche Versionen gekennzeichnet sein
sollten, um fehlerhafte Käufe zu vermeiden.

Registration of works and other subject matter – is it a good
idea?

Registration is not often discussed in copyright in the EU as
the existing international treaties in the area prohibit
formalities as a condition for the protection and exercise of
rights. However, this prohibition is not absolute29

For example, it does not affect “domestic” works – i.e. works
originating in the country imposing the formalities as opposed
to works originating in another country.

. Moreover a system of registration does not need to be made
compulsory or constitute a precondition for the protection and
exercise of rights. With a longer term of protection and with
the increased opportunities that digital technology provides
for the use of content (including older works and works that
otherwise would not have been disseminated), the advantages and
disadvantages of a system of registration are increasingly being
considered30

On the basis of Article 3.6 of the Directive 2012/28/EU ofthe
European Parliament and of the Council of 25 October 2012 on
certain permitted uses of orphan works, a publicly accessible
online database is currently being set up by the Office for
Harmonisation of the Internal Market (OHIM) for the
registration oforphan works.

.

Would the creation of a registration system at EU level help in
the identification and licensing of works and other subject
matter?

YES

 NO

 NO OPINION

What would be the possible advantages of such a system?

[Open question]

Zumeinen wären Urheber auf diese Weise angehalten, sich
festzulegen, ob Sie Schutz für ihr Werk in Anspruch nehmen
wollen. Bisher ist die Gewährung von Nutzungsrechten mit
größerem Aufwand verbunden als ihre Nichtgewährung. Zum
anderen wäre es für Interessenten an Werken einfacher, Kontakt
mit dem Urheber aufzunehmen, um sich über die Konditionen einer
Lizensierung zu einigen. Für Kreative steigt zudem die
Möglichkeit zur Selbstvermarktung und zur direkten Kooperation
mit anderen Autoren, die bisher auch aus organisatorischen
Gründen über Zwischenlizensierung z.B. über Verlage geschieht.

Im Falle der Einführung eines Siegels für die faire Nutzung von
Eigentum (offenes, flexibles Fair-Use System) und für andere
freie Lizenzen (PublicDomain, Creative Commens,GPL), könnte
auch eine Registrierung und damit eine Möglichkeit der besseren
Nachvollziehbarkeit von Nutzungsrechten einhergehen.

What would be the possible disadvantages of such a system?

[Open question]

Ein solches System bedeutet natürlich zusätzlichen
Verwaltungsaufwand. Dieser dürfte aber durch die einfache
Lizensierung (s.o.) aufgewogen werden.

Für große Rechteinhaber, die aktuell an der Bereitstellung einer
Infrastruktur für die eigentlichen Urheber verdienen, könnte ein
solches System eine geschwächte Stellung gegenüber den
lizensierenden Autoren mit sich bringen.

Für bereits veröffentlichte Werke ist ein hoher Aufwand für die
Ersterfassung notwendig.

What incentives for registration by rightholders could be
envisaged?

[Open question]

Mit einemzentralen Register besäßen Interessenten die
Möglichkeit, die Rechteinhaber über diese zentrale Stelle
ausfindig zu machen. Insbesondere für Rechteinhaber, die an
einer langfristigen Verfügbarkeit ihrer Werke interessiert
sind, bietet eine solche Infrastruktur inhärente Vorteile.

Eine offen einsehbare und gut dokumentierte Rechtekennzeichnung
bietet auch für die Nutzer klar erkennbaren Überblick, was mit
diesem Werk für Nutzungsrechte und -Verbote einhergehen
(idealerweise mit direkter Verlinkung).

Eine Darstellung der Schutzzeiträume und damit die Filterung
nach abgelaufenem Schutz könnte es ermöglichen,
urheberrechtlich freigegebenen Inhalt frei wiederzuverwenden.
(generell sollte die Schutzwirkung überdacht und die Zeiträume
verringert werden s. Frage 20).

How to improve the use and interoperability of identifiers

There are many private databases of works and other subject
matter held by producers, collective management organisations,
and institutions such as libraries, which are based to
a greater or lesser extent on the use of (more or less)
interoperable, internationally agreed ‘identifiers’.
Identifiers can be compared to a reference number embedded in a
work, arespecific to the sector in which they have been
developed31

E.g. the International Standard Recording Code (ISRC) is used to
identify recordings, the International Standard Book Number
(ISBN) is used to identify books.

, and identify, variously, the work itself, the owner or the
contributor to a work or other subject matter. There are
notable examples of where industry is undertaking actions to
improve the interoperability of such identifiers and databases.
The Global Repertoire Database32

You will find more information about this initiative on the
following website:http://www.globalrepertoiredatabase.com/.

should, once operational, provide a single source of information
on the ownership and control of musical works worldwide. The
Linked Content Coalition33

You will find more information about this initiative (funded in
part by the European Commission) on the following website:
www.linkedcontentcoalition.org.

was established to develop building blocks for the expression
and management of rights and licensing across all content and
mediatypes. It includes the development of a Rights Reference
Model (RRM) – a comprehensive data model for all types of
rights in all types of content. The UK Copyright Hub34

You will find more information about this initiative on the
following website:http://www.copyrighthub.co.uk/.

is seeking to take such identification systems a step further,
and to create a linked platform, enabling automated licensing
across different sectors.

What should be the role ofthe EU in promoting the adoption
of identifiers in the content sector, and in promoting the
development and interoperability of rights ownership and
permissions databases?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Term of protection – is it appropriate?

Works and other subject matter are protected under copyright for
a limited period of time. After the term of protection has
expired, a work falls into the public domain and can be freely
used by anyone (in accordance with the applicable national
rules on moral rights). The Berne Convention35

Berne Convention for the Protection of Literary and Artistic
Works,http://www.wipo.int/treaties/en/ip/berne/.

requires a minimum term of protection of 50 years after the
death of the author. The EU rules extend this term of
protection to 70 years after the death of the author (as do
many other countries, e.g. the US).

With regard to performers in the music sector and phonogram
producers, the term provided for in the EU rules also extend 20
years beyond what is mandated in international agreements,
providing for a term of protection of 70 years after the first
publication. Performers and producers in the audio-visual
sector, however, do not benefit from such an extended term of
protection.

Are the current terms of copyright protection still appropriate
in the digital environment?

 YES – Please explain

NO – Please explain if they should be longer or shorter

Maximale Dauer für Verwertungsrechte: Verwertungsrechte sollten
(auch für bereits bestehende Werke) an die Länge der
Innovationszyklen angepasst werden. Andererseits gehen
geschaffene Werke und Werte der Gesellschaft verloren.

Nachgedacht werden könnte beispielsweise über eine variable
Länge der Schutzfristen, die sich an der Nutzung der Rechte
orientiert. Sobald ein Rechteinhaber kein Interesse mehr an der
Lizensierung der Werke zeigt, könnten die Schutzfristen bereits
vor Ablauf ihrer Maximaldauer erlöschen. Auf diese Weise würde
sichergestellt, dass die Schutzfristen nicht länger anhalten
als vom Rechteinhaber genutzt werden. Auf Überprüfung bzw.
Nachweis der Nutzung könnte unter Umständen verzichtet werden,
wenn die Aufrechterhaltung der Schutzrechte miteiner Gebühr
belegt würde.

Im Speziellen sind viele Computerspiele sind bereits wenige
Jahre nach dem Erstrelease kaum noch nutzbar. Rechteinhaber
sind meist wenig bis gar nicht an der Pflege und Nutzbarmachung
z.B. für neue Betriebssysteme interessiert,da es sich nicht mehr
rechnet. Kürzere Schutzfristen könnten dazu beitragen, dass die
Inhalte auch durch weitere Personen erhalten werden können.

Für Digitale Inhalte ist es sehr üblich, dass Nutzer
Zusatzinhalte und Abwandlungen selbst erstellen und dieseder
Gesellschaft unentgeltlich wieder zur Verfügung stellen. Diese
Kultur würde durch geringere Schutzfristen gefördert.

NO OPINION

Limitations and exceptions in the Single Market

Limitations and exceptions to copyright and related rights
enable the useof works and other protected subject-matter,
without obtaining authorisation from the rightholders, for
certain purposes and to a certain extent (for instance the use
for illustration purposes of an extract from a novel by a
teacher in a literature class). At EU level they are
established in a number of copyright directives, most notably
Directive 2001/29/EC36

Plus Directive 96/9/ECon the legal protection of
databases;Directive 2009/24/ECon the legal protection of
computer programs,and Directive92/100/ECon rental right and
lending right.

.

Exceptions and limitations in the national and EU copyright laws
have to respect international law37

Article 9(2) of the Berne Convention for the Protection of
Literary and Artistic Works (1971); Article 13 of the TRIPS
Agreement (Trade Related Intellectual Property Rights) 1994;
Article 16(2) of the WIPO Performers and Phonograms Treaty
(1996); Article 9(2) of the WIPO Copyright Treaty (1996).

. In accordance with international obligations, the EU acquis
requires that limitations and exceptions can only be applied in
certain special cases which do not conflict with a normal
exploitation of the work or other subject matter and do not
unreasonably prejudice the legitimate interest of the
rightholders.

Whereas the catalogue of limitations and exceptions included in
EU law is exhaustive (no other exceptions can be applied to the
rights harmonised at EU level)38

Other than the grandfathering of the exceptions of minor
importance for analogue uses existing in Member States at the
time of adoption of Directive 2001/29/EC (see, Art. 5(3)(o)).

, these limitations and exceptions are often optional39

With the exception of certain limitations: (i) in the Computer
Programs Directive, (ii) in the Database Directive, (iii)
Article 5(1) in the Directive 2001/29/EC and (iv) the Orphan
Works Directive.

, in the sense that Member States are free to reflect in
national legislation as many or as few of them as they wish.
Moreover, the formulation of certain of the limitations and
exceptions is general enough to give significant flexibility to
the Member States as to how, and to what extent, to implement
them (if they decide to do so). Finally, it is worth noting
that not all of the limitations and exceptions included in the
EU legalframeworkfor copyright are of equivalent significance
in policy terms and in terms of their potential effect on the
functioning of the Single Market.

In addition, in the same manner that the definition of the
rights is territorial (i.e. has an effect only within the
territory of the Member State), the definition of the
limitations and exceptions to the rights is territorial too (so
an act that is covered by an exception in a Member State "A" may
still require the authorisation of the rightholder once we move
to the Member State "B")40

Only the exception established in the recent Orphan Works
Directive (a mandatory exception to copyright and related
rights in the case where the rightholders are not known or
cannot be located) has been given a cross-bordereffect, which
means that, for instance, once a literary work – for instance a
novel – is considered an orphan work in a Member State, that
same novel shall be considered an orphan work in all Member
States and can be used and accessed in all Member States.

.

The cross-border effect of limitations and exceptions also
raises the question of fair compensation of rightholders. In
some instances, Member States are obliged to compensate
rightholders for the harm inflicted on them by a limitation or
exception to their rights. In other instances Member States are
not obliged, but may decide, to provide for such compensation.
If a limitation or exception triggering a mechanism of fair
compensation were to be given cross-border effect (e.g. the
books are used for illustration in an online course given by an
university in a Member State "A" and the students are in a
Member State "B") then there would also be a need to clarify
which national law should determine the level of that
compensation and who should pay it.

Finally, the question of flexibility and adaptability is being
raised: what is the best mechanism to ensure that the EU and
Member States’ regulatory frameworks adapt when necessary
(either to clarify that certain uses are covered by an
exception or to confirmthat for certain uses the authorisation
of rightholders is required)? The main question here is whether
a greater degree of flexibility can be introduced in the EU and
Member States regulatory framework while ensuring the required
legal certainty, including for the functioning of the Single
Market, and respecting the EU's international obligations.

Are there problems arising from the fact that most limitations
and exceptions provided in the EU copyright directives are
optional for the Member States?

YES– Please explain by referring to specific cases

Handel über Landesgrenzen hinweg, insbesondere der Kauf im
Ausland, ist für Bürger der EU keine Seltenheit mehr.
Insbesondere, da das Internet über Landesgrenzen hinweg
existiert, ist es sehr einfach geworden, sich über Angebote zu
informieren. Daher sollte es keine nationalen Ausnahmen geben –
zumindest nicht in der Europäischen Gemeinschaft. Die
Freizügigkeit von Menschen und Waren im europischen Raum gilt
unseres Erachtens nach auch für das Internet. Jedoch ist bei
Übertreten der (virtuellen) Landesgrenzen den Bürgern nicht so
einfach zuzumuten, dass sie sich mit den unterschiedlichen
Rechtsprechungen zum Gebrauch des und beim Verhalten im
Internet vertraut sind. Wenn sie sich im Urlaub einloggen oder
in einem Forum in einem anderen EU-Land Taten begehen, die im
Herkunftsland erlaubt, im Gastland jedoch auf einmal illegal
sind, müsste sich jeder Nutzer aus Gründen der
Unübersichtlichkeit gegen das Nutzen von Diensten in anderen
EU-Ländern entscheiden, was nicht dem Freizügigkeitsgrundsatz
entspricht. Das physikalische Übertreten von politischen
Grenzen birgt besseres Verständnis dafür, dass man damit in
einen potentiell anders gelagerten Rechtsraum eintritt. Bei
einem Klick auf dem Copmuter ist das nicht soeindeutig.

Ausnahmen im Urheberrecht müssen von allen Mitgliedsstaaten
gleichermaßen angenommen/umgesetzt werden!

NO – Please explain

NO OPINION

Should some/all of the exceptions be made mandatory and, if so,
is there a need for a higher level of harmonisation of such
exceptions?

YES – Please explain by referring to specific cases

Alle Ausnahmen verpflichtendgleich für alle Mitglieder. Sonst
droht Rechtunsicherheit für Nutzer im europäischen Raum und
fragmentiertes Urheberrecht, welches kein nicht-Experte mehr
versteht.

NO – Please explain

NO OPINION

Should any new limitations and exceptions be added to or removed
from the existing catalogue?Please explain by referring to
specific cases.

[Open question]

Fair-use-System: nach Vorbild der USA

Right to Review: Rezensionen müssen möglich sein, wenn nicht das
Stück in voller Länge ohne Unterbrechungen durch die eigentliche
Rezension gezeigt wird,bspw. Let’s-Play, Musik- und
Spiele-Reviews

Right to Stream (ohne Herunterladen)

Right to remix: Recht auf Verändern des ursprünglichen Werks zur
eigenen Interpretation. Verplichtung zu Lizensierung von
Inhalten zu annehmbaren Bedingungen, wenn abgeleitete Inhalte
entstehen sollen.

Öffentlich (z.B. durch Fördergelder) finanzierte Inhalte
sollten der Allgemeinheit entsprechend früher zur Verfügung
stehen. Rein öffentlich finanzierte Inhale sofot. Denkbar wäre
zum Beispiel eine Rreduzierung der maximalen Dauer von
Schutzrechten auf denselben Anteil, der privat Finanziert
wurde. Wurde beispielsweise ein Film zu Hälfte aus staatlichen
Mitteln finanziert, sollte die Schutzfrist maximal die halbe
maximale Dauer betragen.

Independently from the questions above, isthere a need to
provide for a greater degree of flexibility in the EU
regulatory framework for limitations and exceptions?

YES – Please explain why

Es ist bei der Schnelllebigkeit von Trends in der digitalen
Kultur nicht von vornherein absehbar, welche(kulturellen)
Entwicklungen Urheberrechtsinteressen von Inhabern wecken oder
tangieren. Flexible, offene Normen garantieren einen schnellen
Prozess zur Anpassung der Ausnahmen, die europaweit eingehalten
werden.

Sofern es diesen nicht beeinträchtigt, sollte Europa neben der
Harmonisierung des Marktes seine Chancen nutzen, die durch
seine Gliederung bestehen. Wenn ein Staat Förderungen an
bestimmte Bedingungen knüpft, sollte dies möglich sein. Maßgabe
muss aber sein, dassEinwohner anderer EU-Staaten sowieder
grenzüberschreitende Handel nicht beeinträchtigt werden.

 NO – Please explain why

 NO OPINION

If yes, what would be the best approach to provide for
flexibility? (e.g. interpretation by national courts and the
ECJ, periodic revisions of thedirectives, interpretations by
the Commission, built-in flexibility, e.g. in the form of a
fair-use or fair dealing provision / open norm, etc.)? Please
explain indicating what would be the relative advantages and
disadvantages of such an approach as wellas its possible
effects on the functioning of the Internal Market.

[Open question]

Fair-Use - Fair-Deal und flexible, offene Normen wären die beste
Alternative. Der Nutzer wüsste, dass er nicht unkommentierte und
unbearbeitete Werke verbreiten dürfte, manmüsste dies nicht für
jedes Werk anpassen. Der Nutzer müsste nur
Quellen/Urheber/Siegel angeben, um die Werbewirkung für den
ursprünglichen Inhalt zu erhöhen. Nationale Ausnahmen
verringern die Übersicht dagegen massiv.

Über ein Mindestmaß an Regeln hinaus, auf welche sich vor allem
für Konsumenten immer berufen können, könnte (z.B. auch für eine
Übergangsfrist der Harmonisierung) das Recht des
Herkunftslandes (innerhalb der EU) des Urhebers gelten. Wenn
ein Mitgliedsstaat zum Beispiel Fair-Use erlaubt, gilt diese
Regelung für alle aus diesem Mitgliedsland angemeldeten
beziehungsweise in diesem stammenden Werke. Der Binnenmarkt
würde für das definierte Mindestmaß ohne weiteren Aufwand
gelten. Wenn darüber hinaus im Ursprungsland des Inhalts
geltende Regelungen genutzt werden sollen, setzt dieses nur
Wissen über die weiteren Möglichkeiten voraus, bedeutet also
keine prinzipielle Einschränkung des bestehenden Binnenhandels.

Does the territoriality of limitations and exceptions, in your
experience, constitutea problem?

YES – Please explain why and specify which exceptions you are
referring to

Nutzer im Internet wissen dadurch nie genau, welches Recht und
welche (ausländische) Bestimmungen sie gerade übertreten
könnte. Im nächsten Urlaub oder bei Nutzung eines Systems in
einem anderen EU-Land sollten sie nicht Gefahr laufen, durch
ihnen vertraute und ihnen als legal erkannte Handlungen,
Regressanforderungen gegenüberzustehen (Bsp.: Mitnahme einer
Sicherheitskopie der Lieblings-CD im Auto nach UK). Die
Regelnmüssen in der gesamten EU dieselben sein.

NO – Please explain why and specify which exceptions you are
referring to

 NO OPINION

In the event that limitations and exceptions established at
national level were to have cross-border effect, how should
thequestion of “fair compensation” be addressed, when such
compensation is part of the exception? (e.g. who pays whom,
where?)

[Open question]

Sollte die Ausnahme eine Vergütung vorsehen, wäre es von
Vorteil, wenn eine übergeordnete
europäischeVerwertungsgesellschaft die Vergütungen
koordiniert. Die nationalen Elemente wären damit überfordert,
da der Lizenzrechtsdschungel wenig handhabbar ist. Dazu ist es
jedoch notwendig, dass Inhalte für den gesamten Europäischen
Raum lizensiert werden.

Der Zugang zu Medien, die in einzelnen Mitgliedsaaten gegen
geltendes Recht verstoßen (beschlagnahmte Güter) sollte für
diese Staatsbürger nach Maßgabe nicht zugänglich sein.
Alterseingestufter Inhalt muss sicher nicht in Minderjährige
Hände gelangen. Ansonstensollten keine nationalen
Urheberrechtsausnahmen zugelassen werden.

Access to content in libraries and archives

Directive2001/29/EC enables Member States to reflect in their
national law a range of limitations and exceptions for the
benefit of publicly accessible libraries, educational
establishments and museums, as well as archives. If
implemented, these exceptions allow acts of preservation and
archiving41

Article 5(2)c of Directive 2001/29.

and enable on-site consultation of the works and other subject
matter in the collections of such institutions42

Article 5(3)n of Directive 2001/29.

. The public lending (under an exception or limitation) by these
establishments of physical copies of worksand other subject
matter is governed by the Rental and Lending Directive43

Article 5 of Directive 2006/115/EC.

.

Questions arise as to whether the current framework continues to
achieve the objectives envisaged or whether it needs to be
clarified or updated to cover use in digital networks. At the
same time, questions arise as to the effect of such a possible
expansion on the normal exploitation of works and other subject
matter and as to the prejudice this may cause to rightholders.
The role of licensingand possible framework agreements between
different stakeholders also needs to be considered here.

Preservation and archiving

The preservation of the copies of works or other subject-matter
held in the collections of cultural establishments (e.g.
books,records, or films) – the restoration or replacement of
works, the copying of fragile works - may involve the creation
of another copy/ies of these works or other subject matter.
Most Member States provide for an exception in their national
laws allowing for the making of such preservation copies. The
scope of the exception differs from Member State to Member
State (as regards the type of beneficiary establishments, the
types of works/subject-matter covered by the exception, the
mode of copying and the number of reproductions that a
beneficiary establishment may make). Also, the current legal
status of new types of preservation activities (e.g. harvesting
and archiving publicly available web content) is often
uncertain.

(a)[In particular if you are aninstitutional user:]Have you
experienced specific problems when trying to use an exception
to preserve and archive specific works or other subject matter
in your collection?

(b)[In particular if you are a right holder:]Have you
experienced problems withthe use by libraries, educational
establishments, museum or archives of the preservation
exception?

 YES – Please explain, by Member State, sector, and the type
of use in question.

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO

NO OPINION

If there are problems, how would they best be solved?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

If your view is that a legislative solution is needed, what
would be its mainelements? Which activities of the beneficiary
institutions should be covered and under which conditions?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

If your view is that a different solution is needed, whatwould
it be?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Off-premises access to library collections

Directive 2001/29/EC provides an exception for the consultation
of works and other subject-matter(consulting an e-book,
watching a documentary) via dedicated terminals on the premises
of such establishments for the purpose of research and private
study. The online consultation of works and other
subject-matter remotely (i.e. when the library user is not on
the premises of the library) requires authorisation and is
generally addressed in agreements between
universities/libraries and publishers. Some argue that the law
rather than agreements should provide for the possibility to,
and the conditions for,granting online access to collections.

(a)[In particular if you are an institutional user:]Have you
experienced specific problems when trying to negotiate
agreements with rights holders that enable you to provide
remote access, including across borders,to your collections (or
parts thereof) for purposes of research and private study?

(b)[In particular if you are an end user/consumer:]Have you
experienced specific problems when trying to consult, including
across borders, works and othersubject-matter held in the
collections of institutions such as universities and national
libraries when you are not on the premises of the institutions
in question?

(c)[In particular if you are aright holder:]Have you negotiated
agreements withinstitutional users that enable those
institutions to provide remote access, including across
borders, to the works or other subject-matter in their
collections, for purposes of research and private study?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

If there are problems, how would they best be solved?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

If your view is that a legislative solution is needed, what
wouldbe its main elements? Which activities of the beneficiary
institutions should be covered and under which conditions?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

If your view is that a different solution isneeded, what would
it be?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

E – lending

Traditionally, public libraries have loaned physical copies of
works (i.e. books, sometimes also CDs and DVDs) to their
users.Recent technological developments have made it
technically possible for libraries to provide users with
temporary access to digital content, such as e-books, music or
films via networks. Under the current legal framework,
libraries need to obtain the authorisation of the rights
holders to organise such e-lending activities. In various
Member States, publishers and libraries are currently
experimenting with different business models for the making
available of works online, including direct supply of e-books
to libraries by publishers or bundling by aggregators.

(a)[In particular if you are alibrary:]Have you experienced
specific problems when trying to negotiate agreements to enable
the electronic lending (e-lending), including across borders, of
booksor other materials held in your collection?

(b)[In particular if you are an end user/consumer:]Have you
experienced specific problems when trying to borrow books or
other materials electronically (e-lending), including across
borders, from institutions such as public libraries?

(c)[In particular if you are aright holder:]Have you negotiated
agreements with libraries to enable them to lend books or other
materials electronically, including across borders?

 YES – Please explain with specific examples

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO

NO OPINION

If there are problems, how would they best be solved?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

The following two questions are relevant both to this point (n°
3) and the previous one (n° 2).

[Inparticular if you are an institutional user:]What differences
do you see in the management of physical and online collections,
including providing access to your subscribers? What problems
have you encountered?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

[In particular if you are a right holder:]What difference do you
see between libraries’ traditional activities such as
on-premises consultation or public lending and activities such
as off-premises (online, at a distance) consultation and
e-lending? What problems have you encountered?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Mass digitisation

The term “mass digitisation” is normally used to refer to
efforts by institutions such as libraries and archives to
digitise (e.g. scan) the entire contentor part of their
collections with an objective to preserve these collections
and, normally, to make them available to the public. Examples
are efforts by libraries to digitise novels form the early part
of the 20thcentury or whole collections of picturesof historical
value. This matter has been partly addressed at the EU level by
the 2011 Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) on key principles on
the digitisation and making available of out of commerce works
(i.e. works which are no longer found in the normal channels of
commerce), which is aiming to facilitate mass digitisation
efforts (for books and learned journals) on the basis of
licence agreements between libraries and similar cultural
institutions on the one hand and the collecting societies
representing authors and publishers on the other44

You will find more information about his MoU on the following
website:http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/copyright/out-of-commerce/index_en.htm.

. Provided the required funding is ensured (digitisation
projects are extremely expensive), the result of this MoU
should be that books that are currently to be found only in the
archives of, for instance, libraries will be digitised and made
available online to everyone. The MoU is based on voluntary
licences (granted by CollectiveManagement Organisations on the
basis of the mandates they receive from authors and
publishers). Some Member States may need to enact legislation
to ensure the largest possible effect of such licences (e.g. by
establishing in legislation a presumption of representation of
a collecting society or the recognition of an “extended
effect” to the licences granted)45

France and Germany have already adopted legislation to back the
effects of the MoU.The French act (LOI n° 2012-287 du 1er mars
2012 relative à l'exploitation numérique des livres
indisponibles du xxe siècle) foresees collective management,
unless the author or publisher in question opposes such
management.The German act (Gesetz zur Nutzung verwaister und
vergriffener Werke und einer weiteren Änderung des
Urheberrechtsgesetzes vom 1.Oktober 2013) contains a legal
presumption of representation by a collecting society in
relation to works whose rightholders are not members of the
collecting society.

.

[In particular if you are an institutional user,engaging or
wanting to engage in mass digitisation projects, a right
holder, a collective management organisation:]Would it be
necessary in your country to enact legislation to ensure that
the results of the 2011 MoU (i.e. the agreements concluded
between libraries and collecting societies) have a cross-border
effect so that out of commerce works can be accessed across the
EU?

 YES – Please explain why and how it could best be achieved

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO OPINION

Would it be necessary to developmechanisms, beyond those already
agreed for other types of content (e.g. for audio- or
audio-visual collections, broadcasters’ archives)?

 YES – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO OPINION

Teaching

Directive 2001/29/EC46

Article 5(3)a of Directive 2001/29.

enables Member States to implement in their national legislation
limitations and exceptions for the purpose of illustration for
non-commercial teaching. Such exceptions would typically allow
a teacher to use parts of or full works to illustrate his
course, e.g. by distributing copies of fragments of a book or
of newspaper articles in the classroom or by showing protected
content on a smart board without having to obtain authorisation
from the right holders. The open formulation of this (optional)
provisionallows for rather different implementation at Member
States level. The implementation of the exception differs
fromMember State to Member State, with several Member States
providing instead a framework for the licensing of content for
certain educationaluses. Some argue that the law should provide
for better possibilities for distance learning and study at
home.

(a)[In particular if you are an end user/consumer or an
institutional user:]Have you experienced specific problems when
trying to use works or other subject-matter for illustration for
teaching, including across borders?

(b)[In particular if you are a right holder:]Have you
experienced specific problems resulting from the wayin which
works or other subject-matter are used for illustration for
teaching, including across borders?

 YES – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO

NO OPINION

If there are problems, howwould they best be solved?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

What mechanisms exist in the market place to facilitate the use
of content for illustration for teaching purposes? How
successful arethey?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

If your view is that a legislative solution is needed, what
would be its main elements? Which activities of the beneficiary
institutions should be coveredand under what conditions?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

If your view is that a different solution is needed, what would
it be?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Research

Directive 2001/29/EC47

Article 5(3)a of Directive 2001/29.

enables Member States to choose whether to implement in their
national laws a limitation for the purpose of non-commercial
scientific research. Theopen formulation of this (optional)
provision allows for rather different implementations at Member
States level.

(a)[In particular if you are an end user/consumer or an
institutional user:]Have you experienced specific problems when
trying to use worksor other subject matter in the context of
research projects/activities, including across borders?

(b)[In particular if you are a right holder:]Have you
experienced specific problems resulting from the way in which
works or other subject-matter areused in the context of
research projects/activities, including across borders?

 YES – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO

NO OPINION

If there are problems, how would they best be solved?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

What mechanisms exist in the Member States to facilitate the use
of content for research purposes? How successful are they?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Disabilities

Directive 2001/29/EC48

Article 5 (3)b of Directive 2001/29.

provides for an exception/limitation for the benefit of people
with a disability. The open formulation of this (optional)
provision allows for rather different implementations at Member
States level. At EU and international level projects have been
launched to increase the accessibility of works and other
subject-matter for persons with disabilities (notably by
increasing the number of works published in special formats and
facilitating their distribution across the European Union)49

The European TrustedIntermediaries Network (ETIN) resulting from
a Memorandum of Understanding between representatives of the
right-holder community (publishers, authors, collecting
societies) and interested parties such as associations for
blind and dyslexic persons
(http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/copyright/initiatives/access/index_en.htm)
and the Trusted Intermediary Global Accessible Resources (TIGAR)
project in WIPO (http://www.visionip.org/portal/en/).

.

The Marrakesh Treaty50

Marrakesh Treaty to Facilitate Access to Published Works by
Visually Impaired Persons and Persons with Print Disabilities,
Marrakesh, June 17 to 282013.

has been adopted to facilitate access to published works for
persons who are blind, visually impaired, or otherwise print
disabled. The Treaty creates a mandatory exception to copyright
that allows organisations for the blind to produce,
distributeand make available accessible format copies to
visually impaired persons without the authorisation of the
rightholders. The EU and its Member States have started work to
sign and ratify the Treaty. This may require the adoption of
certain provisions at EUlevel (e.g. to ensure the possibility
to exchange accessible format copies across borders).

(a)[In particular if you are a person with a disability or an
organisation representing persons with disabilities:]Have you
experienced problems with accessibility to content, including
across borders, arising from Member States’ implementation of
this exception?

(b)[In particular if you are an organisation providing services
for persons with disabilities:]Have you experienced problems
when distributing/communicating works published in special
formats across the EU?

(c)[In particular if you are a right holder:]Have you
experienced specific problems resulting from the application of
limitations or exceptions allowing for the
distribution/communication of workspublished in special
formats, including across borders?

 YES – Please explain by giving examples

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO

NO OPINION

If there are problems, what could be done to
improveaccessibility?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

What mechanisms exist in the market place to facilitate
accessibility to content? How successful are they?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Text and data mining

Text and data mining/content mining/data analytics51

For the purpose of the present document, the term “text and data
mining” will be used.

are different terms used to describe increasingly important
techniques used in particular by researchers for the
exploration of vast amounts of existing texts and data (e.g.,
journals, web sites, databases etc.). Through the use of
software or other automated processes, ananalysis is made of
relevant texts and data in order to obtain new insights,
patterns and trends.

The texts and data used for mining are either freely accessible
on the internet or accessible through subscriptions to e.g.
journals and periodicals that give access to the databases of
publishers. A copy is made of the relevant texts and data (e.g.
on browser cache memories or in computers RAM memories or onto
the hard disk of a computer), prior to the actual analysis.
Normally, it is considered that to mine protected works or
other subject matter, it is necessary to obtain authorisation
from the right holders for the making of such copies unless
such authorisation can be implied (e.g. content accessible to
general public without restrictions on the internet, open
access).

Some argue that the copies required for text and data mining are
covered by the exception for temporary copies in Article 5.1 of
Directive 2001/29/EC. Others consider that text and data mining
activities should not even be seen as coveredby copyright. None
of this is clear, in particular since text and data mining does
not consist only of a single method, but can be undertaken in
several different ways. Important questions also remain as to
whether the main problems arising in relation tothis issue go
beyond copyright (i.e. beyond the necessity or not to obtain
the authorisation to use content) and relate rather to the need
to obtain “access” to content (i.e. being able to use e.g.
commercial databases).

A specific Working Group was set up on this issue in the
framework of the "Licences for Europe" stakeholder dialogue. No
consensus was reached among participating stakeholders on either
the problems to be addressed or the results. At the same time,
practical solutions to facilitate text and data mining of
subscription-based scientific content were presented by
publishers as an outcome of “Licences for Europe”52

See the document “Licences for Europe – ten pledges to bring
more content
online”:http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/copyright/docs/licences-for-europe/131113_ten-pledges_en.pdf.

. In the context of these discussions, other stakeholders argued
that no additional licences should be required to mine material
to which access has been provided through a subscription
agreement and considered that a specific exception for text and
data mining should be introduced, possibly on the basis of
a distinction between commercial andnon-commercial.

(a)[In particular if you are an end user/consumer or an
institutional user:]Have you experienced obstacles, linked to
copyright, when trying to use text or data mining methods,
including across borders?

(b)[In particular if you are aservice provider:]Have you
experienced obstacles, linked to copyright, when providing
services based on text or data mining methods, including across
borders?

(c)[In particular if you are a right holder:]Have you
experienced specific problems resultingfrom the use of text and
data mining in relation to copyright protected content,
including across borders?

 YES – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO OPINION

If there are problems, how would they best be solved?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

If your view is that a legislative solutionis needed, what would
be its main elements? Which activities should be covered and
under what conditions?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

If your view is that a different solution is needed, whatwould
it be?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Are there other issues, unrelated to copyright, that constitute
barriers to the use of text or data mining methods?

[Open question]……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

User-generated content

Technological and service developments mean that citizens can
copy, use and distribute content at little to no financial
cost. As a consequence, new types ofonline activities are
developing rapidly, including the making of so-called
“user-generated content”. While users can create totally
original content, they can also take one or several
pre-existing works, change something in the work(s), and upload
the result on the Internet e.g. to platforms and blogs53

A typical example could be the “kitchen” or “wedding” video
(adding one's own video to a pre-existing sound recording), or
adding one's own text to a pre-existing photograph. Other
examples are “mash-ups”(blending two sound recordings), and
reproducing parts of journalistic work (report, review etc.) in
a blog.

. User-generated content (UGC) can thus cover the modification
of pre-existing works even if the newly-generated/"uploaded"
work does not necessarily require a creative effortand results
from merely adding, subtracting or associating some
pre-existing content with other pre-existing content. This kind
of activity is not “new” as such. However, the development of
social networking and social media sites that enable users to
share content widely has vastly changed the scale of such
activities and increased the potential economic impact for
those holding rights in the pre-existing works. Re-use is no
longer the preserve of a technically and artisticallyadept
elite. With the possibilities offered by the new technologies,
re-use is open to all, at no cost. This in turn raises
questions with regard to fundamental rights such the freedom of
expression and the right to property.

A specific Working Group wasset up on this issue in the
framework of the "Licences for Europe" stakeholder dialogue. No
consensus was reached among participating stakeholders on either
the problems to be addressed or the results or even the
definition of UGC. Nevertheless, a wide range of views were
presented as to the best way to respond to this phenomenon. One
view was to say that a new exception is needed to cover UGC, in
particular non-commercial activities by individuals such as
combining existing musical works with videos, sequences of
photos, etc. Another view was that no legislative change is
needed: UGC is flourishing, and licensing schemes are
increasingly available (licence schemes concluded between
rightholders and platforms as well as micro-licences concluded
between rightholders and the users generating the content. In
any event, practical solutions to ease user-generated content
and facilitate micro-licensing for small users were pledged by
rightholders across different sectors as a result of the
“Licences for Europe” discussions54

See the document “Licences for Europe – ten pledges to bring
more content
online”:http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/copyright/docs/licences-for-europe/131113_ten-pledges_en.pdf.

.

(a)[In particular if you are an end user/consumer:]Have you
experienced problems when trying to use pre-existing works or
other subject matter to disseminate new content on the
Internet, including across borders?

(b)[In particular if you are a service provider:]Have you
experienced problems when users publish/disseminate new content
based on the pre-existing works or other subject-matter through
your service, including across borders?

(c)[In particular if you are a right holder:]Have you
experienced problems resulting from the way the users are using
pre-existing works or other subject-matter to disseminate new
content on the Internet, including across borders?

YES – Please explain by givingexamples

Youtube Videos von sogenannten Let’s-Playern und von
Rezensierenden Nutzern wurden in einem automatischen Verfahren
gesperrt, weil sie Ausschnitte aus geschütztem Material
beinhalteten. Es wurden dabei nicht gesamt Stücke gezeigt oder
bereitgestellt. Computerspieler erstellen gerne gratis
sogenannte Modifikationen die Spielmechaniken eines bestehen
Spiels verwenden um neuen Inhalt zu schaffen oder den
bestehenden zu erweitern. Für diese Mods wird keine
Monetarisierung betrieben und sie werden freivon Gegenleistung
angeboten. Einige Rechteinhaber untersagen unter Hinweis auf
ihr geistiges Eigentum jedoch diese Entwicklung.

 NO

 NO OPINION

(a)[In particular if you are an end user/consumer or a right
holder:]Have you experienced problems when trying to ensure
that the work you have created (on the basis ofpre-existing
works) is properly identified for online use? Are proprietary
systems sufficient in this context?

(b)[In particular if you are a service provider:]Do you provide
possibilities for users that are publishing/disseminating the
works they have created (on the basis of pre-existing works)
through your service to properly identify these works for
online use?

YES – Please explain

Es erscheint sinnvoll, ein Siegel oder Urheberzeichen zu
schaffen, mit dem ein Nutzer nach dem Fair-Use Prinzip erklärt,
dass er fremde Inhalte zu Dokumentations-, Kommentar-, Satire-
oder ähnlichen (nichtkommerziellen) Zwecken nutzt. Gleichzeitig
würde damit erklärt, dass nicht der gesamte Inhalt
unverändertals eigene Urheberleistung dargestellt wird
(ähnlich einer Zitation).

 NO – Please explain

 NO OPINION

(a)[In particular if you are an end user/consumer or a right
holder):]Have you experienced problems when trying to be
remunerated for the use of the work you have created (on the
basis of pre-existing works)?

(b)[In particular if you are a service provider:]Do you provide
remuneration schemes for users publishing/disseminating the
works they have created (on the basis of pre-existing works)
through your service?

YES – Please explain

Die Bearbeitung fremder Werke zu Dokumentations-, Kommentar-,
Interpretations-, Satire- oder ähnlichen Zwecken muss möglich
sein. Es muss möglich sein, auf Basis Werke anderer, eigene
Kunst auszudrücken. Es gibtBeispiele, vor allem auf der
Videoplattform Youtube, dass Werke, die nicht hauptsächlich aus
fremden Material bestehen, sich jedoch damit befassen,
automatisiert gesperrt wurden und die Monetisierungsmechanismen
den Urhebern der beinhalteten Inhaltsausschnitte vollständig
zugerechnet wurde. Nutzer können so aus Eigenleistungen keine
Vorteile ziehen, sondern müssen im Gegenteil fürchten, für Ihre
Arbeit keinerlei Entschädigung zu bekommen und alles an den
Inhaber des Inhaltes eines Ausschnittes in ihrem Werkzu
verlieren. Besonders schwierig ist die Auswirkung bei
automatisierten Inhalts-Management Systemen, die Werke
automatisiert sperren können, die auch nur zu einem Bruchteil
einem vorher von einem anderen Rechteinhaber angegebenen Werk
entsprechen. Eine Analogie wäre es, wenn ein in einem anderen
Werk zitierter Autor die vollständigen Autorenvergütungen des
zitierenden erhalten würden, ohne dass dieser wirksame
Rechtsmittel einlegen könnte.

 NO – Please explain

 NO OPINION

If there are problems, howwould they best be solved?

[Open question]

Es sollte eine Art Fair-Use System eingeführt werden, welches
das Erstellen eigener Werke auf Basis anderer Werke ohne
vollständiges, unbearbeitetes Kopieren ganzer Inhalte möglich
macht. Dazu ist eine offene, flexible Norm mit Ausnahmen
notwendig, die EU-weitverbindlich ist und die schnell an
kulturelle Änderungen anpassbar ist und nicht strikt geregelt
ist (muss auf "ähnliche" Ausnahmen zutreffen können). Eine
Monetisierung muss in gewissen Grenzen ohne Erlaubnis des
Rechteinhabers möglich sein. Im Gegenzug muss der Rechtinhaber
eine Einspruchsmöglichkeit haben, wenn er meint, der Inhalt
wäre nicht genügend als neuer Inhalt zu erkennen (bspw.
Prozentanteil des ursprünglichen Inhaltes >70%).

Es soll weiterhin untersagt werden, ganze Musiktitel, Videos,
Filme, etc. ohne Bearbeitung im Sinne von Dokumentations-,
Kommentar-, Satire- oder ähnlichen Zwecken zu veröffentlichen
und daraus monetäre Vorteile zu ziehen.

If your view is that a legislative solution is needed,what would
be its main elements? Which activities should be covered and
under what conditions?

[Open question]

Flexibilität, kombinierend aus einer europaweit verbindlichen
Ausnahmenliste und diesen Ausnahmen "ähnlichen" Nutzungen
(damit nicht für jede kulturelle Entwicklung der Bearbeitung
und des "Remix" eine Anpassung notwendig ist.)

Remix-Ausnahme: Bearbeitungen von ursprünglichen Inhalten ohne
Abgaben im nicht kommerziellen Bereich und eine Kennzeichnung
für Inhalte, die auf anderen basieren mit einer kommerziellen
Fair-Use-Kennzeichnung, die mit einer geringen Lizenzgebühr
veröffentlichungsfähig und monetisierbar ist.

Den freien Waren- und Dienstleistungsverkehr innerhalb der EU
auch für digitale Güter festschreiben, so dass Ländergrenzen
nicht im Internet nachgebildet werden können und bspw.
nationale Wirtschaftsräume entstehen.

Jugendschutzstandards gemeinsam erarbeiten. Verbindliche,
kostengünstige Alterskontrollen ermöglichen und vorschreiben
(spw. über eID), sodass frei handelbare Digitalgüternicht
unrechtmäßig nicht direkt von Minderjährigen abgerufen werden
können

If your view is that a different solution is needed, what would
it be?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Private copyingand reprography

Directive 2001/29/EC enables Member States to implement in their
national legislation exceptions or limitations to the
reproduction right for copies made for private use and
photocopying55

Article 5. 2)(a) and (b) of Directive 2001/29.

. Levies are charges imposed at national level on goods
typically used for such purposes (blank media, recording
equipment, photocopying machines, mobile listening devices such
as mp3/mp4 players, computers, etc.) with a view to compensating
rightholders for the harm they suffer when copies are made
without their authorisation by certaincategories of persons
(i.e. natural persons making copies for their private use) or
through use of certain technique (i.e. reprography). In that
context, levies are important for rightholders.

With the constant developments in digital technology, the
question arises as to whether the copying of files by
consumers/end-users who have purchased content online - e.g.
when a person has bought an MP3 file and goes on to store
multiplecopies of that file (in her computer, her tablet and
her mobile phone) - also triggers, or should trigger, the
application of private copying levies. It is argued that, in
some cases, these levies may indeed be claimed by rightholders
whether or not the licence fee paid by the service provider
already covers copies made by the end user. This approach could
potentially lead to instances of double payments whereby levies
could be claimed on top of service providers’ licence fees56

Communication "Unleashingthe Potential of Cloud Computing in
Europe", COM(2012) 529 final.

57

These issues were addressed in the recommendations of Mr António
Vitorino resulting from the mediation on private copying and
reprography levies. You can consult these recommendations onthe
following
website:http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/copyright/docs/levy_reform/130131_levies-vitorino-recommendations_en.pdf.

.

There is also an on-going discussion as to the application or
not of levies to certain types of cloud-based services such as
personal lockers or personal video recorders.

In your view, is there a need to clarify at the EU level the
scope and application of the private copying and reprography
exceptions58

Art. 5.2(a) and 5.2(b) of Directive 2001/29/EC.

in the digital environment?

YES – Please explain

Privatkopien müssen erlaubt bleiben, damit gekaufte Inhalte
nicht unwiederbringlich verloren gehenund eine andauernde
Nutzung sichergestellt ist. Das Recht auf Weiterveräußerung
muss gewahrt bleiben, wobei keine natürlich Kopien behalten
werden dürfen, sobald das Nutzungsrecht auf den jeweiligen
anderen Nutzer gegangen ist.

 NO – Please explain

 NOOPINION

Should digital copies made by end users for private purposes in
the context of a service that has been licensed by
rightholders, and where the harm to the rightholder is minimal,
be subject to private copying levies?59

This issue was also addressed in the recommendations of Mr
Antonio Vitorino resulting from the mediation on private
copying and reprography levies

 YES – Please explain

NO – Please explain

Der Kauf eines (digitalen) Gutes beinhaltet unserer Meinung nach
bereits die Vervielfältigungsrechte für den privaten, nicht
kommerziellen Gebrauch. Die Nutzer haben durch die Erstellung
einer privaten Kopie keinen Mehrwert der Nutzung, sondern
höchstens die Möglichkeit die fortgesetzte Nutzung zu sichern,
was ihr gutes Recht ist. Dieses Recht auf Privatkopie sollte in
keiner Weise eingeschränkt werden, auch nicht mit einer
Beschränkung der Anzahl der Kopien.

Bei Wiederverkauf oder unbezahlter Weitergabe darf natürlich
weiter vorgeschrieben bleiben, dass Kopien des veräußerten
Originals vom Veräußernden zerstört oder unbrauchbar
gemachtwerden, damit nicht eine Doppelnutzung erfolgen kann. In
Deutschland zumindest werden Nutzer bereits beim Kauf von
Druckern, Kopierern, DVD-Brennern, etc. mit einer Abgabe für
Kopien die Vervielfältigungsentschädigung abgegolten haben

NO OPINION

How would changes in levies with respect to the application to
online services (e.g. services based on cloud computing
allowing, for instance, users to have copies on different
devices) impact the development andfunctioning of new business
models on the one hand and rightholders’ revenue on the other?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Would you see an added value in making levies visible on the
invoicesfor products subject to levies?60

This issue was also addressed in the recommendations of Mr
Antonio Vitorino resulting from the mediation on private
copying and reprography levies.

YES – Please explain

Es würde das Verständnis/das Gespür der Verbraucher für das
Thema fördern und schärfen.

 NO – Please explain

 NO OPINION

Diverging national systems levy different products and apply
different tariffs. This results in obstacles to the free
circulation of goods and services in the Single Market. At the
same time, many Member States continue to allow the
indiscriminate application of private copying levies to all
transactions irrespective of the person to whom the product
subject to a levy is sold (e.g. private person or business). In
that context, not allMember States have ex ante exemption and/or
ex post reimbursement schemes which could remedy these
situations and reduce the number of undue payments61

This issue was also addressed in the recommendations of Mr
Antonio Vitorino resulting from themediation on private copying
and reprography levies.

.

Have you experienced a situation where a cross-border
transaction resulted in undue levy payments, or duplicate
payments of the same levy, or other obstacles to the free
movement of goods or services?

 YES – Please specify the type of transaction and indicate
the percentage of the undue payments. Please also indicate how
a priori exemption and/or ex post reimbursement schemes could
help to remedy the situation.

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO OPINION

What percentage of products subject to a levy is sold to persons
other than natural persons for purposesclearly unrelated to
private copying? Do any of those transactions result in undue
payments? Please explain in detail the example you provide
(type of products, type of transaction, stakeholders, etc.).

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Where such undue payments arise, what percentage of trade do
they affect? To what extent could a priori exemptions and/or ex
post reimbursement schemes existing in some Member States help
to remedy the situation?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

If you have identified specific problems with the current
functioning of the levy system, how would these problems best
besolved?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Fair remuneration of authors and performers

The EU copyright acquis recognises for authors and performers a
number of exclusive rights and, in the case of performers whose
performances are fixed in phonograms, remuneration rights. There
are few provisions in the EU copyright law governing
thetransferof rights from authors or performers to producers62

See e.g. Directive 92/100/EEC, Art.2(4)-(7).

or determining who the owner of the rights is when the work or
other subject matter is created in the context of an employment
contract63

See e.g. Art. 2.3. of Directive 2009/24/EC, Art. 4 of Directive
96/9/EC.

. This is an area that has been traditionally left for Member
States to regulate and there are significant differences in
regulatory approaches. Substantial differences also exist
between different sectors of the creative industries.

Concerns continue to be raised that authors and performers are
not adequatelyremunerated, in particular but not solely, as
regards online exploitation. Many consider that the economic
benefit of new forms of exploitation is not being fairly shared
along the whole value chain. Another commonly raised issue
concerns contractual practices, negotiation mechanisms,
presumptions of transfer of rights, buy-out clauses and the
lack of possibility to terminate contracts. Some stakeholders
are of the opinion that rules at national level do not suffice
to improve their situation and that action at EU level is
necessary.

[In particular if you are an author/performer:] What is the best
mechanism (or combination of mechanisms) to ensure that you
receive an adequate remuneration for the exploitation of your
works and performances?

[Openquestion]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Is there a need to act at the EU level (for instance to prohibit
certain clauses in contracts)?

YES – Please explain

Verträge sollten so gestaltet werden, dass sie von einem
durchschnittlichen Nutzer verstanden werden können. Besonders
kritisch zu sehen ist in diesem Zusammenhang, dass Verträge oft
Klauseln binhalten, die bereits jetzt gegen europäisches Recht
verstoßen. Diese (auch in lokalisierten Fassungen)
beizubehalten, hat als einziges Resultat, den Endnutzer zu
verwirren und über seine Rechte und Pflichten in Unkenntnis zu
setzen. Aus diesem Grund sollten gegen besseres Wissen oder
schwer fahrlässig in Verträge erfolgte Aufnahme rechtswidriger
oder ungültiger Formulierungen bestraft werden.

Der Entzug der Nutzungsmöglichkeit, wie er zur Zeit durch DRM
nicht nur möglich ist, sondern auch praktiziert wird, muss klar
als rechtswidrig gebrandmarkt werden.

 NO – Please explain why

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO OPINION

If you consider that the current rules are not effective, what
would you suggest to address the shortcomings you identify?

Aktuell fehlt es anMöglichkeiten, regelkonformes Verhalten der
Anbieter gerade bei Verträgen auch durchzusetzen.

Respect for rights

Directive 2004/48/EE64

Directive 2004/48/EC of the European Parliament and of the
Council of 29 April 2004 on the enforcement
of intellectualproperty rights.

provides for a harmonised framework for the civil enforcement of
intellectual property rights, including copyright and related
rights. The Commission has consulted broadly on this text65

You will find more information on the following
website:http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/iprenforcement/directive/index_en.htm

. Concerns have been raised as to whether some of its provisions
are still fit to ensure a proper respect for copyright in the
digital age. On the one hand, the current measures seem to be
insufficient to deal with the new challenges brought by the
dissemination of digital content on the internet; on the other
hand, there are concerns about the current balance between
enforcement of copyright and the protection of fundamental
rights, in particular the right for a private life and data
protection. While it cannot be contested that enforcement
measures should always be available in case of infringement
ofcopyright, measures could be proposed to strengthen respect
for copyright when the infringed content is used for a
commercial purpose66

For example when the infringing content is offered on a website
which gets advertising revenues that depend on the volume of
traffic.

. One means to do this could be to clarify the role of
intermediaries in the IP infrastructure67

This clarification should not affect the liability regime of
intermediary service providers established by Directive
2000/31/EC on electronic commerce, which will remain unchanged.

. At the same time, there could be clarification of the
safeguards for respect of private life and data protection for
private users.

Should the civil enforcement system in the EU be rendered
moreefficient for infringements of copyright committed with a
commercial purpose?

 YES – Please explain

 NO – Please explain

 NO OPINION

In particular, is the current legal framework clear enough to
allow for sufficient involvement of intermediaries (such as
Internet service providers, advertising brokers, payment
service providers, domain name registrars, etc.) in inhibiting
online copyright infringements with a commercial purpose? If
not, what measures would be useful to foster the cooperation of
intermediaries?

[Open question]

Nein, der Rahmen muss europaweit geregelt sein, um mit dem (zu
entstehenden) europäischen freien digitalen Freizügigkeitsraum
mithalten zu können.

- Vermittler, wie etwa Linksammlungen, sollten nicht sofort mit
Forderungenüberzogen werden können. Sie sollen angehalten
werden, ihre Verlinkung auf Anfrage zu löschen - dürfen aber
auch bei Versäumnis erst belangt werden, wenn schuldhaftes
Versagen oder böser Willen nachgewiesen wird. Letztendlich hat
die Tat der Zurverfügungstellung ja jemand anderes begangen. -
europaweit verbindliche Ausnahmen zum Urheberrecht sollen vor
Schadenersatzforderungen schützen - ISP sollten generell nur
durch Gerichtsbeschluss zur Herausgabe von Verbindungsdaten
verurteilt werden können. - Rechteinhaber müssen bei
Entschädigungsforderungen realen wirtschaftlichen Schaden
durch die Veröffentlichung nachweisen und nicht einen
virtuellen Verdienstausfall geltend machen dürfen (bspw. keine
überzogene Abmahnungen für einen Musiktitel, den ein
Jugendlicher herunterlädt) - Schwere eines Verstoßes soll sich
nach Ausmaß der einnahmeorientierten, gewerbsmäßigenHandlung
der mit der Schadenersatzforderung konfrontierten Person
richten - Unterlassungserklärungen (Impressumspflicht, etc.)
sollten grundsätzlich gedeckelt und EU-weit gleich hoch sein -
Werbevermittler sollen ebenfalls angehalten werden, nach
missbräuchlicher Verwendung ihrer Werbung (bspw. auf illegalen
Inhalte-Hostern) zu fahnden. Schließlich verdienen sie an der
Urheberrechtsverletzung mit und ohne die Werbung sind viele
illegale Angebote kaum haltbar.Daher ist eine Mithaftung auch
bei Schadenersatzforderungen verhältnismäßig.

Does the current civil enforcement framework ensure that the
right balance is achieved between the right to have one’s
copyright respected and other rights such as the protection of
private life and protection of personal data?

 YES – Please explain

NO – Please explain

Rechteinhaber können noch zu sehr in die Rechte der Nutzer
eingreifen, indem beispielsweise einfachNutzungen per
Fernschalte untersagt/unterbunden werden können. Das geht sogar
so weit, dass Geräte (Google Glass) oder (Spiele-)Kopien von
Nutzern per push-Befehl unbrauchbar gemacht werden ohne dass
der Nutzer sich wehren könnte. Das machen Firmen nach eigenem
Gusto und nicht nach gerichtlicher Anordnung, bspw. wenn ein
Nutzer eine schlechte Kritik schreibt oder wenn er sich bei dem
Unternehmen beschwert (Google behält sich vor, die Nutzung von
Produkten einseitig auszusetzen und Geräte unbrauchbar zu
machen, wenn man sich nicht den Regeln des Unternehmens
unterwirft).

Die Nutzung von Gütern darf kein Lizenzrecht werden, sondern
muss Besitzrecht bleiben, was nicht ohne Gerichtsurteil
einseitig aufgehoben werden kann.

Datenschutzrechte werde nicht eingehalten, wenn nicht
europäische Firmen Daten auf ihre Server Kopieren und die
Grenzen des Safe Harbour Gesetzes nicht durchsetzbar sind und
auch nicht eingehalten werden. Kundendaten sollten stets
verpflichtend verschlüsselt übertragen und gespeichert
werden.Weitergabe darf nicht pauschal abgefragt werden, die
beiteiligten Stellen an die eine Weitergabe erfolgen soll,
müssen genannt und einzeln vom Nutzer freigegeben werden. So
soll verhindert werden, dass Nutzer ungewollt selbst zum
Produkt werden. Dabei können Gruppierungen bei der Übersicht
helfen:

(Bsp.: "Möchten Sie Ihre Daten freigeben zur Nutzung durch:

- den Anbieter selber (notwendig zum Anbieten des
grundsätzlichen Dienstes)

- Werbefirmen (erweiterbare Liste beteiligter Stellen)

- Statistik- undUmfrageunternehmen (erweiterbare Liste
beteiligter Stellen)

- (Cloud-)Speicheranbieter (erweiterbare Liste beteiligter
Stellen)

- etc......)

 NO OPINION

A single EU Copyright Title

The idea of establishing a unified EU Copyright Title has been
present inthe copyright debate for quite some time now,
although views as to the merits and the feasibility of such an
objective are divided. A unified EU Copyright Title would
totally harmonise the area of copyright law in the EU and
replace national laws. There would then be a single EU title
instead of a bundle of national rights. Some see this as the
only manner in which a truly Single Market for content
protected by copyright can be ensured, while others believe
that the same objective can better be achieved byestablishing a
higher level of harmonisation while allowing for a certain
degree of flexibility and specificity in Member States’ legal
systems.

Should the EU pursue the establishment of a single EU Copyright
Title, as a means of establishing a consistent framework for
rights and exceptions to copyright across the EU, as well as a
single framework for enforcement?

YES

Dies würde für Verbraucher sowie Rechteinhaber ein
einheitlichen, verbindlichen Rechtsraum schaffen und weniger
Verwirrung im Lizensierungsverfahren bedeuten.

 NO

 NO OPINION

Should this be the next step in the development of copyright in
the EU? Does the current level of difference among the Member
State legislation mean that this is a longer term project?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Other issues

The above questionnaire aims to provide a comprehensive
consultation on the most important matters relating to the
current EU legal framework for copyright. Should any important
matters have been omitted, we would appreciate if you could
bring them to our attention, so they can be properly addressed
in the future.

Are there any other important matters related to the EU legal
framework for copyright? Please explainand indicate how such
matters should be addressed.

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

