








Response from Royal National Institute of Blind People (RNIB) to the Public
Consultation on the review of the EU copyright rules



1. About us



As the largest organisation of blind and partially sighted people in the
UK, RNIB is pleased to have the opportunity to respond to this
consultation.





We are a membership organisation with over 10,000 members who are blind,
partially sighted or the friends and family of people with sight loss. 80
per cent of our Trustees and Assembly Members are blind or partially
sighted. We encourage members to be involved in our work and regularly
consult with them on government policy and their ideas for change.




As a campaigning organisation of blind and partially sighted people, we
fight for the rights of people with sight loss in each of the UK’s
countries. Our priorities are to:


 • Stop people losing their sight unnecessarily
 • Support independent living for blind and partially sighted people
 • Create a society that is inclusive of blind and partially sighted
   people's interests and needs.

We also provide expert knowledge to business and the public sector through
consultancy on improving the accessibility of the built environment,
technology, products and services.

RNIB is a member of the Right to Read Alliance which works to achieve an
accessible world for all print disabled people. We have a strong track
record of partnership and engagement with publishing and related
industries.


Our Interest Representative Register ID is 34063417604-07

TYPE OF RESPONDENT

For the purposes of this consultation, we are a representative of
consumers.

We have only answered those questions which we deem to be of relevance to
the interests of blind and partially sighted people.

21. Are there problems arising from the fact that most limitations and
exceptions provided in the EU copyright directives are optional for the
Member States?

YES

In terms of the disability exception in 5.3.b, RNIB notes that it is an
optional, rather than obligatory, exception. In practice, to our knowledge,
all Member States have implemented an exception for disabled people.
However, the non-mandatory nature of the exception leaves open the worrying
possibility that any Member State could legally remove its disability
exception if it chose to do so.

22. Should some/all of the exceptions be made mandatory and, if so, is
there a need for a higher level of harmonisation of such exceptions?

YES

Given the importance as a public policy objective of ensuring access to
copyright works for disabled people through exceptions, RNIB believes that
were the Directive to be amended, the exception in 5.3.b should be made
mandatory.

Making the exception mandatory would align the EU and its Member States
with the objectives of the “Marrakesh Treaty to Facilitate Access to
Published Works for Persons Who Are Blind, Visually Impaired, or Otherwise
Print Disabled” (henceforth referred to here as the “Marrakech Treaty”) and
indeed those set out in Article 9 of the UN Convention on the Rights of
Persons with Disabilities, ratified by the EU on 23rd December 2010.


26. Does the territoriality of limitations and exceptions, in your
experience, constitute a problem?

YES

This is the case, because it prevents the sending of accessible format
works made under national copyright exceptions (implemented in line with
5.3.b of the Copyright Directive) across EU Member State borders,
especially between countries sharing the same language.

At the moment, blind and partially sighted people are living through a
“book famine” in which a very small percentage of books are ever made
accessible in formats such as audio, large print or braille. Most of the
work to produce and supply accessible format books is done by organisations
of blind people, or other specialist organisations, often charities.  To
maximise scant resources, these organisations need to be able to send
accessible books or digital files of these books to other such
organisations in other countries, especially in cases where two countries
share the same language. Doing so would avoid costly duplication and allow
these organisations to make more accessible titles available to the people
they serve.

However, such a transfer has largely not been possible due to questions
over the legality of doing so, even when such a transfer would be between
two EU Member States.

The book famine contrasts starkly with the position of non-disabled people
in the EU. Non-disabled EU citizens enjoy ever-easier and more rapid access
to books in many languages through mainstream commercial channels, both
within and outside the borders of their respective Member States.

A speedy and effective ratification of the Marrakech Treaty, outside of any
possible revision of the Directive, ought to solve this problem of sending
books across borders, and this would be our preferred solution.


50.   (a) [In particular if you are a person with a disability or an
organisation representing persons with disabilities:] Have you experienced
problems with accessibility to content, including across borders, arising
from Member States’ implementation of this exception?
(b) [In particular if you are an organisation providing services for
persons with disabilities:] Have you experienced problems when
distributing/communicating works published in special formats across the
EU?
 
YES

A and b: As mentioned above, the problem we experience is that it is still
illegal or legally questionable, even within the EU, to send accessible
format books transcribed using national copyright exceptions to disabled
people or their organisations across international borders- whether those
borders be within the EU or outside the EU.

The exception in 5.3.b does not cover the cross-border sending of
accessible books.

To that end, to send accessible books from one country to another, we have
to fall back on licenses from rights holders, which are often not
forthcoming, can be costly, and take time to obtain, or else decline
requests we receive from print disabled people in other countries for
accessible books from our collection.


51.   If there are problems, what could be done to improve accessibility?

[Open question]

We need the Commission and all EU Member States to move quickly to sign and
ratify the Marrakech Treaty, which will thus remove the legal barrier
mentioned above, and provide a clear legal framework under which we can
quickly and effectively send accessible books from one country to another,
whether inside or outside the EU. To avoid unnecessary and significant
delay, ratification should be achieved outside of the (possible) revision
of Directive 2001/29/EC.

Another legal concern RNIB has relates to 6.4 paragraph 4 of the Directive
2001/29/EC. In short, the Directive currently states that Member States
shall "take appropriate measures" to ensure that Technological Measures (in
layman's terms a sort of "digital padlock") do not to prevent the use of
the disability exception provided in Article 5.3.b of the Directive. This
is helpful in asserting the important fact that Technological Measures
should not block legitimate enjoyment of the disability exception.

However, paragraph 4 of 6.4 says that this requirement that technological
measures do not render exceptions ineffective does not apply to the "right
of making available". (It states: "The provisions of the first and second
subparagraphs shall not apply to works or other subject-matter made
available to the public on agreed contractual terms in such a way that
members of the public may access them from a place and at a time
individually chosen by them.")

We are concerned that this "making available" exemption might have the
effect that works such as books which are streamed / or ebooks for download
would not be covered by the "Technological Measures should not stop
legitimate use of an exception" concept in 6.4 of the Directive.

As we understand it, paragraph 6.4.4 could be interpreted to mean that
access to some sorts of "on-demand" work by a visually impaired person
under the exception could be breaking the law if they have to break a
Technological Measure to make such a work accessible. We note that there
are different views as to what services 6.4.4 covers, but feel that as a
matter of principle and practicality, the Directive should not hamper the
legitimate use of the disability exception by allowing Technological
Measures to block that use in some cases.

Were the Directive to be reopened, RNIB would urge the Commission to look
again at this matter, with a view to ensuring that a revised Directive
would more clearly allow print disabled people full enjoyment of the
Directive's exceptions. We feel confident that the caveats about the
disability exception being only for disabled people, and only on a non-
commercial basis, would still constitute sufficient protection for rights
holders, even if this protection for Technological Measures for on-demand
works were removed.

52.   What mechanisms exist in the market place to facilitate accessibility
to content? How successful are they?

Ultimately, RNIB wants the "book famine" faced by visually impaired and
other print disabled people, solved in the "mainstream" by publishers. We
want to be able to get accessible format books in the same way as everyone
else -by buying them at the same time and price as non-disabled people, and
by obtaining them from a library. Our members are involved in many
initiatives with publishers and other organisations in the publishing
chain, too numerous to mention here, with the aim of making this dream a
reality. Just by way of example, see this page from RNIB for "Publishing
Professionals".

http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/copyright/copyright-infso/index_en.htm

Accessibility improvements have already been made by the publishing/
software industry. We welcome these and urge more of them. But there is a
very long way to go. Too often, the technical tools that could be used to
make mainstream books accessible are still not known or used. An effective,
modern and appropriate legal framework should be in place now to complement
these efforts and to ensure that where mainstream provision / "the market"
fails, as it still, most often, does,  organisations providing books to
blind people can legally make good as much as possible of the shortfall.


80. Are there any other important matters related to the EU legal framework
for copyright? Please explain and indicate how such matters should be
addressed.


RNIB would like to underline our view that the EU should proceed rapidly
with both the ratification and implementation of the Marrakech Treaty.

It should be remembered that it is the first treaty aiming to directly meet
some of the objectives of the UN Convention on the Rights of Persons with
Disabilities.

We urge the EU to set a strong precedent by speedily ratifying and
implanting the MarrakechTreaty, so as to allow this new law to make its
vital contribution to access to information, social inclusion, employment
and culture for print disabled people.

For further information please contact

Dan Pescod
Campaigns Manager, Europe, International and Accessibility
Royal National Institute of Blind People (RNIB)
105 Judd Street
London  WC1H 9NE  email: dan.pescod@rnib.org.uk
