


Public Consultation

on the review of the EU copyright rules

Contents

I.  Introduction  2

A.  Context of the consultation  2

B.  How to submit replies to this questionnaire  3

C.  Confidentiality  3

II.  Rights and the functioning of the Single Market  7

A.  Why is it not possible to access many online content
services from anywhere in Europe?  7

B.  Is there a need for more clarity as regards the scope of
what needs to be authorised (or not) in digital transmissions?
10

1.  The act of “making available”  10

2.  Two rights involved in a single act of exploitation  11

3.  Linking and browsing  12

4.  Download to own digital content  13

C.  Registration of works and other subject matter – is it a
good idea?  14

D.  How to improve the use and interoperability of identifiers
15

E.  Term of protection – is it appropriate?  15

III.  Limitations and exceptions in the Single Market  16

A.  Access to content in libraries and archives  19

1.  Preservation and archiving  19

2.  Off-premises access to library collections  20

3.  E – lending  21

4.  Mass digitisation  22

B.  Teaching  23

C.  Research  25

D.  Disabilities  25

E.  Text and data mining  27

F.  User-generated content  28

IV.  Private copying and reprography  31

V.  Fair remuneration of authors and performers  33

VI.  Respect for rights  34

VII.  A single EU Copyright Title  36

VIII.  Other issues  36

Please identify yourself:

Name:TheAssociation ofFinnish Non-Fiction Writers

In the interests of transparency, organisations (including, for
example, NGOs, trade associations and commercial enterprises)
are invited to provide the public with relevant information
about themselves by registering in the Interest Representative
Register and subscribing to its Code of Conduct.

If you are a Registered organisation, please indicate your
Register ID number below. Your contribution will then be
considered as representing the views of your organisation.

138.003

Type of respondent

XAuthor/PerformerORRepresentativeof authors/performers

This submission is made by the FinnishAssociation ofNon-Fiction
Writers.

The Finnish Association ofNon-fiction Writers is thebiggest
writerorganizationin Finland with its
approximately3.000members, who are writers of non-fiction for
the general public, text books, manuals, dictionaries,
articles, etc.

It is a cultural and professional organization dedicated to
protecting the interests of non-fiction writers. It promotes
Finnish non-fiction, protects the copyright and financial
interests of its writers, provides support for non-fiction
writers and furthers the professional competence and ethics of
its members.

The Association was founded in 1983, as a joint organization for
writers of non-fiction and text books.

Governing the Association is a Board of ten members chaired
byPhDMarkku Löytönen.The Executive Director isPhDJukka-Pekka
Pietiäinen.

We appreciate the possibility to participate inthe Commissions
consultation. We limit our submission to the questions most
relevant to the Finnish Non-Fiction Writers.

Rights and the functioning of the Single Market

Why is it not possible to accessmanyonline content servicesfrom
anywhere in Europe?[Theterritorialscope of the rights involved
in digital transmissions and the segmentation of the market
through licensing agreements]

Holders of copyright and related rights –e.g. writers, singers,
musicians-do not enjoya singleprotection in the EU. Instead,
they are protected on the basis of a bundle of national rights
in each Member State. Those rights have been largely harmonised
by the existingEUDirectives. However,differences remain andthe
geographical scopeof the rightsis limited to the territory of
the Member State granting them.Copyright is thus territorial in
the sense that rights are acquired and enforced on a
country-by-country basis under national law1

This principle has been confirmed by the Court of justice on
several occasions.

.

The dissemination of copyright-protected content on the Internet
–e.g. by a music streaming service,orbyanonline e-book
seller–thereforerequires, in principle,an authorisation for
each national territory in which the content is communicatedto
the public. Rightholdersare, of course,in a position togranta
multi-territorial or pan-Europeanlicence, such thatcontent
services can be provided in several Member States and across
borders.A number of stepshave beentaken at EU level to
facilitate multi-territoriallicences: the proposal for a
Directive on Collective Rights Management2

Proposalfor a Directiveof the European Parliament and of the
Councilof 11 July 2012 on collective management of copyright
and related rights and multi-territorial licensing of rights in
musical works for online uses in the internal market, COM(2012)
372 final.

should significantly facilitate the delivery of
multi-territorial licences in musical worksfor online services3

CollectiveManagementOrganisations play a significant role inthe
management of online rights for musical works in contrastto
thesituation where online rights are licenseddirectly by right
holders such asfilm or record producers or by newspaper or book
publishers.

;thestructured stakeholder dialogue “Licences for Europe”4

You can find more information on the following website:
http://ec.europa.eu/licences-for-europe-dialogue/.

and market-led developments such as the on-going work in the
Linked Content Coalition5

You can find more information on the following
website:http://www.linkedcontentcoalition.org/.

.

"Licences for Europe" addressed in particular the specific issue
of cross-border portability, i.e. the ability of consumers
having subscribed to online services in their Member State to
keep accessing them when travelling temporarily to other Member
States. As a result, representatives of the audio-visual sector
issued a joint statement affirming their commitment to continue
working towards the further development of cross-border
portability6

See the document “Licences for Europe – tem pledges to bring
more content
online”:http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/copyright/docs/licences-for-europe/131113_ten-pledges_en.pdf.

.

Despite progress, there are continued problems
withthecross-borderprovisionof, and access to, services. These
problems are most obviousto consumerswanting to access
servicesthatare madeavailable in Member Statesother than the
one in which they live.Not all online services are available in
all Member States and consumers face problems when trying
to access such services across borders. In some instances,
even if the“same”service is available in all Member States,
consumerscannotaccess theservice across borders (they can
onlyaccess their“national” service, and if they try to
accessthe "same" servicein another Member State they are
redirected to theonedesignatedfortheir country of residence).

Thissituationmayin part stem from the territoriality of
rightsand difficulties associated with the clearing of rights
in different territories.Contractual clauses in licensing
agreements between rightholders and distributors and/or between
distributors and end users mayalsobe at the origin of some of
the problems (denial of access, redirection).

The main issueat stake hereis,therefore,whether furthermeasures
(legislative or non-legislative, including market-led
solutions)need tobe taken at EU level in the medium term7

For possible long term measures such as the establishment of
aEuropean Copyright Code(establishinga single title) see
section VII of this consultation document.

to increase the cross-border availability of content services in
the Single Market,while ensuring an adequate level of
protectionfor right holders.

[In particular if you arean enduser/consumer:]Have you faced
problems whentryingto access online services in an EU Member
State other than the one in which you live?

XNO

[In particular if you area service provider:]Have you faced
problems when seeking to provide online services across
bordersin the EU?

XNOOPINION

[In particular if you area right holder or acollective
management organisation:]Howoftenare youaskedtogrant
multi-territorial licences?Pleaseindicate, if possible, the
number of requests per yearand provide examples indicating the
Member State, the sector and the type of content concerned.

If you have identified problems in the answers to any of the
questions above – what would be the bestway to tacklethem?

[In particular if you area right holder or acollective
management organisation:]Are there reasons why, evenin cases
where you holdall thenecessaryrights forall theterritoriesin
question,youwould still find it necessaryor justifiedto impose
territorial restrictions onaservice provider (in order, for
instance, to ensure that access to certain content is not
possible in certainEuropeancountries)?

XYES – Please explain by giving examples

The copyright holder should be able todeterminethe scope ofthe
allowed uses by the service provider andthe level of
remunerationrespectively. The measures available to supervise
respect of rights might vary between Member States. It might be
necessary for the right holder toset territoriallimitations
tothe scope of the allowed use within individual agreements
with a service provider.

There is no need to legislation restricting this right of the
copyright holder.

[In particular if you aree.g. a broadcasterora service
provider:]Are there reasons why,evenin cases where you have
acquiredall thenecessaryrights for all the
territoriesinquestion,youwould still find it necessaryor
justifiedto impose territorial restrictions on the service
recipient (in order for instance, to redirect the consumer to
a different website than the one he is trying to access)?

Do you think that further measures (legislative or
non-legislative, including market-led solutions) are needed at
EU level to increase the cross-border availability of content
services in the Single Market, while ensuring an adequate level
ofprotection for right holders?

XNO– Please explain

No harmonizing legislation is needed.Commercial users can
acquire permission through individual arrangements.

Is there a need for more clarityas regardsthe scope ofwhat needs
to be authorised (or not) in digital transmissions?[The
definition of the rightsinvolved in digital transmissions]

The EU framework for the protection of copyright and related
rights in the digital environment is largely established by
Directive 2001/29/EC8

Directive 2001/29/EC of the European Parliament and of the
Council of 22 May 2001 on the harmonisation of certain aspects
of copyright and related rights in the information society.

on the harmonisation of certain aspects of copyright and related
rights in the information society. OtherEUdirectives in this
fieldthatare relevant in the online environment are those
relating to the protection of software9

Directive 2009/24/EC of the European Parliament and of the
Council of 23 April 2009 on the legal protection of computer
programs.

and databases10

Directive 96/9/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council
of 11 March 1996 on the legal protection of databases.

.

Directive 2001/29/ECharmonisestherights of authors and
neighbouring rightholders11

Film and record producers, performers and broadcasters are
holders of so-called “neighbouring rights” in, respectively,
their films, records, performances and broadcast. Authors’
content protected by copyright is referred to as a “work” or
“works”, while content protected by neighbouring rights is
referred to as “other subject matter”.

which are essential for thetransmission of digital copiesof
works(e.g. an e-book)and other protected subject matter(e.g. a
record in a MP3 format)over the internetor similar digital
networks.

The mostrelevantrightsfor digital transmissionsarethe
reproduction right, i.e. the right to authorise or prohibit the
making of copies12

The right to “authorise or prohibit direct or indirect,
temporary or permanent reproduction by any means and in any
form, in whole or in part” (see Art. 2 of Directive 2001/29/EC)
although temporary acts of reproduction of a transient or
incidental nature are, under certain conditions, excluded (see
art. 5(1) of Directive 2001/29/EC).

,(notablyrelevant at the start of the transmission –e.g. the
uploading ofadigital copy of a work to a serverin view ofmaking
it available–and at the users’ end– e.g. when a user downloads
a digital copy of a work)and the communication to the
public/making available right, i.e. the rights to authorise or
prohibit the dissemination of the works in digital networks13

The right to authorise or prohibit any communication to the
public by wire or wireless means and to authorise or prohibit
the making available to the public “on demand” (seeArt. 3 of
Directive 2001/29/EC).

.These rightsare intrinsically linked in digital
transmissionsandboth need to be cleared.

Theact of“making available”

Directive 2001/29/EC specifiesneitherwhatis covered bythe making
available right(e.g. the upload,the accessibility by the
public,theactualreception by the public)norwherethe act of
“making available” takes place. This does not raise
questionsif the act is limited to a single territory.
Questionsarise however when the transmission covers several
territories and rights need to be cleared (does the act of
"making available" happeninthe country of the upload only?in
each of the countries where the content is potentially
accessible?in each of the countries where thecontent
iseffectivelyaccessed?).The most recent case law of the Court
of Justice of the European Union (CJEU)suggests that a relevant
criterion is the“targeting” of a certainMember State'spublic14

See in particularCase C-173/11(Football Dataco vs Sportradar)
andCase C-5/11 (Donner) for copyright and related rights, and
Case C-324/09 (L’Oréal vs eBay) for trademarks. With regard to
jurisdiction seealso joined Cases C-585/08 and C-144/09 (Pammer
and Hotel Alpenhof)andpending CaseC-441/13 (Pez Hejduk);
seehowever,adopting a different approach, CaseC-170/12
(Pinckney vs KDG Mediatech).

. According to this approachthecopyright-relevantact(whichhas
tobe licensed)occursat leastin those countries which are
“targeted” by the online service provider.A service provider
“targets” a group of customers residing in a specific country
when it directsits activity to that group, e.g. via
advertisement, promotions, a language or a currency
specifically targeted at that group.

Isthe scope of the“making available”right in cross-border
situations – i.e. when content is disseminated across borders
–sufficiently clear?

XNO–Pleaseexplain how this could be clarified and what
typeofclarification would be required(e.g.as in "targeting"
approach explained above,as in "country of origin"approach15

The objective of implementing a “country of origin”approachis to
localise the copyright relevant act that must be licenced in a
single Member State (the "country of origin", which could be
for example the Member State in whichthe content is uploaded or
wherethe service provider is established), regardless of in how
many Member States the work canbe accessed or received. Such an
approachhas already been introduced at EU level with regard to
broadcasting by satellite(seeDirective 93/83/EEC on the
coordination of certain rules concerning copyright and rights
related to copyright applicable to satellite broadcasting and
cable retransmission).

)

The protection of the right should not be dependent on the type
of technical measureused in “making available”.Copyright
protection is not an obstacle for the free movement of
information. Rather it protects the reasonable interests of the
author. Therefore the same rules should be applicable in online
and analogue environment in order to provide sufficient level
of protection in the cross-border situations.

[In particular if you are a right holder:]Coulda clarification
of the territorial scope of the“making available”right have
aneffect on therecognition of yourrights (e.g.whetheryou are
considered to be an author or not,whetheryou are considered to
have transferred your rights or not),onyourremuneration,
oronthe enforcement of rights(including the availability of
injunctive relief16

Injunctive relief is a temporary or permanent remedy allowing
the right holder to stop or prevent an infringement of his/her
right.

)?

XYES–Please explain howsuchpotential effectscould beaddressed

The clarificationwould have effect on the recognition of rights
in cross-border situations.

Two rights involved in a single act of exploitation

Each act oftransmission in digital networks entails(in the
current state of technology and law) several reproductions.This
means that there are two rights that apply to digital
transmissions: the reproduction right and the making available
right. Thismay complicate the licensing of works for online
usenotably whenthetwo rights are held bydifferent
persons/entities.

[In particular if youa service provider or a right holder:]Does
the application of two rights toa single act of economic
exploitation in the online environment (e.g. a download)create
problemsfor you?

XNO

It is essential for the right holder to be able to exercise the
right by dividing it insmaller pieces.

Linking and browsing

Hyperlinks are references to data that lead a user from one
location in the Internet to another. They are indispensable for
the functioning of the Internet as a network. Severalcasesare
pending before the CJEU17

Cases C-466/12 (Svensson), C-348/13 (Bestwater International)
and C-279/13 (C More entertainment).

in which the question has been raised whether the provision of
a clickable link constitutes an act of communication to the
public/making available to the public subject to the
authorisation of the rightholder.

A user browsing the internet (e.g. viewing a web-page) regularly
creates temporary copies of works and other subject-matter
protected under copyright on the screen and in the 'cache'
memory of his computer. A question has been referred to the
CJEU18

Case C-360/13 (Public Relations Consultants Association Ltd).See
alsohttp://www.supremecourt.gov.uk/decided-cases/docs/UKSC_2011_0202_PressSummary.pdf.

as towhether such copies are always covered by the mandatory
exception for temporary acts of reproduction provided for in
Article 5(1) of Directive 2001/29/EC.

Should the provision of a hyperlink leading to a work or other
subject matter protected under copyright,either in generalor
under specific circumstances,besubject to the authorisation of
the rightholder?

XYES– Please explainwhether you consider this to be the case in
general,or under specificcircumstances,and why

The recent Svensson -judgment provides an unsustainable
interpretation that works made freely available online would be
protected by copyright, but creating a hyperlink to such works
would not require the permission of the author. As a result
authors will be compelled to protect their works by other than
proprietary measures, such as granting access to the website
through passwords. It is our view that this will be likely to
lead to restriction of the free movement of information rather
than promoting it.

It is our view that the scope of protectionshould not be
dependent on the type of technical measure by which the
copyright protected work is made available.Creating a hyperlink
to copyright protected material should be considered to be
within the scope of the exclusive right of the right holder in
situations where economic benefit is pursued through the use of
protected material. As the right holder assumes expenses in
which the creator of a hyperlink has not participated the
economic input should be protected so that it would not be
possiblefor the creator of a hyperlink to take advantage of the
right holders economic input in pursuing economic benefit.

Should the viewing of a web-pagewhere this impliesthetemporary
reproduction of a work or other subject matterprotected under
copyrighton the screen andin thecache memoryof the user’s
computer,either in general or under specific circumstances,be
subject to the authorisation of the rightholder?

XNO OPINION

Download to own digital content

Digital content is increasinglybeing
boughtviadigitaltransmission(e.g. download to own). Questions
arise as to the possibility forusersto dispose of the filesthey
buy inthismanner(e.g. by selling themorby giving them as a
gift).Theprinciple of EU exhaustion of the distribution right
applies in the case of the distribution ofphysical copies (e.g.
when a tangible article such as a CD or a book, etc. is sold,
the right holder cannot preventthefurther distributionof that
tangible article)19

See also recital 28 of Directive 2001/29/EC.

. Theissuethat ariseshere is whether this principlecan also be
applied in the caseof an act of transmission equivalent in its
effect to distribution (i.e. where the buyer acquires the
property of the copy)20

In Case C-128/11 (Oracle vs. UsedSoft) the CJEU ruled that an
author cannot oppose the resale of a second-hand licence that
allows downloading his computer program from his website and
using it for an unlimited period of time. The exclusive right
of distribution of a copy of a computer program covered by such
a licence is exhausted on its first sale.While it is thus
admitted that the distribution right may be subject to
exhaustion in case of computer programs offered for download
with the right holder’s consent, the Court was careful to
emphasise that it reached this decision based on the Computer
Programs Directive. It was stressed that this exhaustion rule
constituted alex specialisin relation to the Information
Society Directive (UsedSoft, par. 51, 56).

.This raises difficultquestions, notably relating to the
practical application of such an approach (how to
avoidre-sellers keepingand usinga copy ofawork afterthey have
“re-sold” it– this is often referred to as the “forward and
delete” question) as well astotheeconomicimplications of the
creation of a second-hand market of copies of perfect quality
that never deteriorate(in contrast to the second-hand market
for physical goods).

[In particular if you arean enduser/consumer:]Haveyou
facedrestrictionswhen trying to reselldigital files that
youhavepurchased(e.g.mp3 file,e-book)?

[In particular if you area right holderor a service provider:]
What would betheconsequencesofproviding a legal framework
enabling the resale ofpreviouslypurchaseddigital content?
Please specify per market(type of content)concerned.

It would beunsustainable for the right holder to allow unlimited
resale of digital copies. Theprinciple ofexhaustion of rightsof
the physical copy of a workcannot beapplied to the digital
content.The similar treatment of physical and digital copy of
the work requires specific regulation.This type of broad
interpretation of the principlecould potentially have a
detrimental effect on the actual market. Essential difference
is thata copy of digital copiescan be sold without limitation,
provided that the original copy remains with the seller.It is
our view that the broad interpretation of the exhaustion of
rights to cover digital copies wouldthereforeconflict with the
normal exploitation of the works and unreasonably prejudice the
legitimate interests of the copyright holder.

Registration of works andother subject matter – is it a good
idea?

Registration is not often discussed in copyrightin the EUas the
existing internationaltreaties in the area prohibit formalities
as a condition for theprotection and exerciseofrights.
However,this prohibition is not absolute21

For example, it does not affect “domestic” works – i.e.works
originating inthe country imposing the formalitiesas opposed to
works originating inanothercountry.

.Moreover a system of registration does not need to bemade
compulsory or constitute a precondition for the protection and
exercise of rights.Witha longer term ofprotectionand with the
increased opportunities that digital technology
providesfortheuse of content(includingolder works and works
thatotherwisewouldnot havebeen disseminated),the advantages and
disadvantages of a system of registrationare increasingly
beingconsidered22

On the basis of Article 3.6 of the Directive 2012/28/EU of the
European Parliament and of the Council of 25 October 2012 on
certain permitted uses of orphan works, a publicly accessible
online database is currently being set up by the Office
forHarmonisation of theInternalMarket (OHIM)for the
registration of orphan works.

.

Wouldthecreation ofa registration system at EU levelhelp in the
identification and licensing of works and other subject matter?

XNO

What would bethe possible advantagesof such a system?

If registration would be made voluntary, there could be some
potential benefits. A public registry would make it easier to
get information for example about who holds the rights to a
certain workand what is the remaining period of protection.This
would be beneficial in facilitating individual licensing
arrangements especially.

What would bethe possible disadvantagesof such a system?

Potential expenses of registrationcould be a problem. Also, in
case registration would be compulsory, it would become a
precondition for the protection of rights.

Whatincentives forregistrationbyrightholderscouldbe envisaged?

A registered copyright would have the benefit of making it
easier to identify the right owner and provide proof of the
copyright.

How to improve theuse andinteroperability ofidentifiers

There are many private databases ofworks and other subject
matterheld by producers, collective management organisations,
and institutions such aslibraries, which are based to a greater
or lesser extent on the use of(more or less)interoperable,
internationally agreed ‘identifiers’. Identifierscan be
compared to a reference number embedded in a work,are specific
to the sector in which they have been developed23

E.g. the International Standard Recording Code (ISRC) is used to
identify recordings, the International Standard Book Number
(ISBN) is used to identify books.

, and identify, variously, the work itself, the owner or the
contributor to a work or other subject matter.There are notable
examples of where industry is undertaking actions to improve the
interoperability of such identifiers and databases. The Global
Repertoire Database24

You will find more information about this initiative on the
following website:http://www.globalrepertoiredatabase.com/.

should, once operational,provide a single source of information
on the ownership and control of musical works worldwide.
TheLinked Content Coalition25

You will find more information about this initiative(funded in
part by the European Commission)on the following website:
www.linkedcontentcoalition.org.

was established to develop building blocks for the expression
and management of rights and licensing across all content and
media types. It includes the development ofa Rights Reference
Model (RRM) – a comprehensive data model for all types of
rights in all types of content. The UK Copyright Hub26

You will find more information about this initiative on the
following website:http://www.copyrighthub.co.uk/.

is seeking to take such identification systems a step further,
and to create a linked platform, enabling automated licensing
across different sectors.

Whatshouldbethe role of theEUin promoting the adoption
of identifiers in the content sector, and in promoting the
development and interoperability of rights ownership and
permissions databases?

In the international management of rights and promotion of
licensing the collective international identifiers in the
content sector have a great significance. It is necessary for
the EU to follow the development of the situation and pursue to
promote interoperability of different databases.

Term of protection– is it appropriate?

Works and other subject matter are protected under copyright for
a limited period of time. After the term of protection has
expired, a work falls into the public domain and can be freely
used by anyone (in accordance with the applicable national
rules on moral rights). The Berne Convention27

Berne Convention for the Protection of Literary and Artistic
Works,http://www.wipo.int/treaties/en/ip/berne/.

requiresa minimum term of protection of 50 years after the death
of the author. The EUrulesextend this term of protection to 70
years after the death of the author (as do many other
countries, e.g. the US).

With regard to performers in the music sector and phonogram
producers, theterm provided for in theEU rulesalsoextend20
years beyond what is mandated in international
agreements,providingfor a term of protection of 70 years after
the first publication. Performers and producers in the
audio-visual sector, however, do not benefit from such an
extended term of protection.

Arethe current terms ofcopyright protection still appropriate in
the digital environment?

XYES– Please explain

The terms of protection on the current levels arestabilized
andappropriate. There is no need to shorten the periodsof
protection.

Limitations and exceptions in the Single Market

Limitations and exceptions to copyright and related rights
enable the use of works and other protected
subject-matter,without obtaining authorisation from the
rightholders,for certain purposes and to a certain extent (for
instance the use for illustrationpurposesof an extract from a
novelby a teacher in a literature class). At EU level theyare
established in a number of copyright directives, most notably
Directive2001/29/EC28

Plus Directive 96/9/ECon the legal protection of
databases;Directive 2009/24/ECon the legal protection of
computer programs,and Directive 92/100/ECon rental right and
lending right.

.

Exceptions and limitations in the national and EU copyright laws
have to respect international law29

Article 9(2) of the Berne Convention for the Protection of
Literary and Artistic Works (1971); Article 13 of the TRIPS
Agreement (Trade Related Intellectual Property Rights) 1994;
Article 16(2) of the WIPO Performers and Phonograms Treaty
(1996); Article 9(2) of the WIPO Copyright Treaty (1996).

.In accordance with international obligations, the EU acquis
requires that limitations and exceptionscanonlybeapplied in
certain special cases which do not conflict with a normal
exploitation of the work or other subject matter and do not
unreasonably prejudice the legitimate interest of the
rightholders.

Whereas thecatalogueof limitations and exceptions included
inEUlawis exhaustive(no other exceptions can be applied to the
rights harmonised at EU level)30

Other than the grandfathering of the exceptions of minor
importance for analogue uses existing in Member States at the
time of adoption ofDirective 2001/29/EC(see, Art. 5(3)(o)).

, these limitations and exceptions areoftenoptional31

With the exception ofcertain limitations: (i)in the Computer
Programs Directive,(ii) in the Database Directive,(iii) Article
5(1) in theDirective 2001/29/ECand(iv) the OrphanWorksDirective.

,in the sense thatMember Statesare free to reflect in national
legislation as many or as few of them as they wish.Moreover,the
formulation of certain of the limitations andexceptionsis
general enough to give significantflexibility totheMember
States as to how,and to what extent,toimplement them (if they
decide to do so). Finally,it is worth noting that not all of
the limitationsand exceptionsincluded in the EUlegal framework
for copyrightare of equivalent significance in policy terms and
in terms of their potential effect on the functioning of the
Single Market.

Inaddition, inthe same manner that the definition of the rights
is territorial (i.e. has an effect only within the territory of
the Member State), the definition of the limitations and
exceptions to the rights is territorial too (so an act that is
covered by an exception in a Member State "A" may still require
the authorisation of the rightholder once we move to the Member
State "B")32

Only theexception established in therecent Orphan Works
Directive(a mandatory exceptionto copyright and related rights
in the case where the rightholders are not known or cannot be
located) has been givena cross-border effect, which means that,
for instance, once a literary work – for instance a novel – is
considered an orphan work in a Member State, that same
novelshall be considered an orphan work in all Member Statesand
can beused and accessed in all Member States.

.

The cross-bordereffectoflimitations andexceptionsalsoraises the
question of fair compensation of rightholders.In some
instances,Member States are obliged to compensate rightholders
for theharminflicted on them bya limitation orexceptionto their
rights. In other instancesMember Statesare not obliged, butmay
decide,to provide for such compensation.If a limitation or
exception triggering a mechanism of fair compensation were to
be given cross-border effect (e.g. the books are used for
illustration in an online course given by an university in
a Member State "A" and the students are in a Member State"B")
then there would also be a need to clarifywhich national law
shoulddeterminethe level of that compensation and who should
pay it.

Finally, the question of flexibility and adaptabilityis being
raised:what is the best mechanism to ensure that the EU and
Member States’ regulatory frameworks adapt when necessary
(either to clarify that certain uses are covered by an
exception or to confirm that for certain uses the authorisation
of rightholders is required)?The main question here is whether
a greaterdegree of flexibility can be introduced in the EU and
Member States regulatory framework while ensuringthe
requiredlegal certainty,including for the functioning of the
Single Market, and respecting the EU's international
obligations.

Are there problems arising from the fact that most limitations
and exceptions provided in the EUcopyrightdirectivesare
optionalfor the Member States?

XNO– Please explain

The legal traditions and models vary greatly among Member
States. The Nordic countries have their own specific legal
traditions and models in organising copyright protection, where
collective licensing has asignificantrole.

It seems that there would not be great advantages in creating
mandatory exceptions or limitations on theCommunitylevel.There
is also no specific need for more detailed norms on Community
level.Theharmonization oflegislation through directives has led
to a balanced situation inFinnishnational legislation as the
copyright exceptions and limitations can be provided through
the sophisticated system ofextendedcollective licensing. The
advantage of the flexibility is that it is possible to take
into account the specific circumstances within the Member
State.The national legislation can befurtherdeveloped on the
basis offlexibility andgeneral principles leaving the practical
solutions of implementation to the discretion of the Member
States.

Should some/all of the exceptions be made mandatory and, if so,
is there aneed for a higher level of harmonisation of such
exceptions?

XNO–Please explain

In accordance with our response to the previous question we do
not seethe need to create mandatory exceptions and limitations.

Should any newlimitations andexceptions be added toor removed
fromthe existing catalogue?Please explain by referring to
specific cases.

See Q 21.

Independently from the questions above, is there a need to
provide for agreaterdegree of flexibility in the EU regulatory
framework for limitations and exceptions?

XNO– Please explain why

There is a sufficient amount of flexibility in the current
situation.See Q 21.

If yes, what would be the best approach to provide for
flexibility? (e.g.interpretation by national courts and the
ECJ, periodic revisions of the directives, interpretations by
the Commission, built-in flexibility, e.g. in the form of a
fair-useor fair dealingprovision / open norm, etc.)?Please
explain indicating what would be the relative advantages and
disadvantages of such an approachas well asitspossible effects
on the functioning of the Internal Market.

Does the territoriality of limitations and exceptions, in your
experience,constitute a problem?

XNO–Please explainwhy andspecify which exceptions you are
referring to

Territoriality does not constitute specific problemsfor
availability or licensing. The currentdemandcan be
adequatelydealt withby the existing models of operation.

In the event that limitationsand exceptionsestablished at
national level were to have cross-border effect, howshouldthe
question of “fair compensation” be addressed, whensuch
compensation is part of the exception? (e.g. who pays whom,
where?)

Access to content in libraries and archives

Directive2001/29/EC enablesMember Statesto reflect in their
national law a rangeoflimitations andexceptions for the benefit
of publicly accessible libraries, educational establishments and
museums, as well as archives. If implemented, these
exceptionsallow acts of preservation and archiving33

Article 5(2)c of Directive 2001/29.

andenable on-site consultation oftheworks and other subject
matter in the collections of such institutions34

Article 5(3)nof Directive 2001/29.

. The public lending(under an exception or limitation)by these
establishments of physical copies of works and other subject
matter is governed by the Rental and Lending Directive35

Article 5 of Directive 2006/115/EC.

.

Questionsarise as to whetherthe current framework continues to
achieve the objectives envisaged or whether it needs to be
clarified or updated to cover use in digital networks. At the
same time, questions arise as to the effect of such a possible
expansion on the normal exploitation of works and other subject
matter and as to the prejudice this may cause to rightholders.
The role of licensing and possible framework agreements between
different stakeholders also needsto be considered here.

Preservationand archiving

The preservation of the copies of worksor othersubject-matter
held in the collections of cultural establishments (e.g. books,
records, or films)– the restoration or replacement of works, the
copying of fragile works -mayinvolvethe creation ofanother
copy/iesof these worksor othersubject matter. Most Member
States provide for an exception in their national laws allowing
for the making of such preservation copies.The scope of the
exceptiondiffersfrom Member State to Member State(as regardsthe
type of beneficiary establishments, the types of
works/subject-mattercovered by the exception, the mode of
copyingand the number of reproductions that a beneficiary
establishment may make).Also, the current legal status of new
types of preservation activities (e.g. harvesting and archiving
publicly available web content) is often uncertain.

(a)[In particular if you arean institutional user:]Haveyou
experienced specific problems when trying to use an exception
to preserve and archive specific works or other subject matter
in your collection?

(b)[In particular if you arearightholder:]Have you experienced
problems with the use by libraries, educational establishments,
museum or archives of the preservation exception?

XNO

If there are problems, how would theybestbe solved?

In Finland the mass uses of copyright protected workssuch as
digitization of the written cultural heritage by the Finnish
National Libraryis organized through the system
ofextendedcollective licensing. This modelbased on public
fundingworks very well for institutional users such as
libraries and archives.

It is important to involve organisations representing right
holders when negotiating the appropriate schemes of extended
collective licensing and level of remuneration.

If your view is that a legislative solution is needed, what
would be its main elements? Which activities of the beneficiary
institutions should be coveredand under which conditions?

If your view is thatadifferent solutionisneeded, what would it
be?

Off-premises access to library collections

Directive 2001/29/EC provides an exception
fortheconsultationofworks and other subject-matter(consulting
an e-book, watching a documentary) viadedicated terminals on
the premises of such establishmentsfor the purpose of research
and private study. The online consultation ofworks and other
subject-matter remotely(i.e. when the library user is not on
the premises of the library)requires authorisation andis
generallyaddressed in agreements between universities/libraries
and publishers.Some argue that the law rather than agreements
should provide for the possibility to, and the conditions
for,grantingonline access to collections.

(a)[In particular if you are an institutional user:]Have you
experienced specific problems when trying to negotiate
agreements with rights holders that enable you to provide
remote access, including across borders,to your collections (or
parts thereof) for purposes of research and private study?

(b)[Inparticular if you are an enduser/consumer:]Have you
experienced specific problems when trying to consult, including
across borders,works and other subject-matter held in the
collections of institutions such as universities and national
libraries when you are not on the premises of the institutions
in question?

(c)[In particular if you are arightholder:]Have you negotiated
agreements with institutional users that enable those
institutions to provide remote access, including across
borders,to the works or other subject-matter in their
collections, for purposes of research and private study?

TheFinnishNational Libraryin co-operation
withKopiostohasestablishedadatabaseto collect, publish and
archivethe articles of the Finnish scientific journals in
electronic form.

If there are problems, how would theybestbe solved?

There are no specific problems requiring legislative activity.

If your view is that a legislative solution is needed, what
would be its main elements? Which activities of the beneficiary
institutions should be coveredand under which conditions?

If your view is thatadifferent solutionisneeded, what would it
be?

E –lending

Traditionally, public libraries haveloanedphysical copies of
works (i.e. books, sometimes also CDs and DVDs) to their users.
Recent technological developments have made it technically
possible for libraries to provide users with temporary access
to digital content,such as e-books, music or films via
networks. Under the current legal framework, libraries need to
obtain the authorisation of the rights holders
toorganisesuche-lending activities. In various Member States,
publishers and libraries are currently experimenting with
different business models for the making available of works
online, including direct supply of e-books to libraries by
publishers or bundling byaggregators.

(a)[In particular if you are alibrary:]Have you experienced
specific problems when trying tonegotiate agreements to enable
the electronic lending(e-lending), including across borders,
ofbooks or other materials held in your collection?

(b)[In particular if you are an enduser/consumer:]Haveyou
experienced specific problems when trying to borrow booksor
other materialselectronically (e-lending), including across
borders,from institutionssuch as public libraries?

(c)[In particular if you are aright holder:]Have you negotiated
agreements with libraries to enable them to lend books or other
materials electronically, including across borders?

XNO

Up to datethe e-lending licensing schemes have been developed
together by the libraries and publishers in the e-lending pilot
project. The organisations representing authors have not been
involved in the negotiations.See Q 72-74.

If there are problems, how wouldtheybestbe solved?

The problem is that currently the organisations
representingauthorsare not involved in the negotiations
ofe-lendinglicensing schemesand authors are remunerated
accordingtothe publishing contract.Thee-lendinglicenses are
negotiated between publishers and librariesexclusively.Single
right holder does not have a fair and balanced position with
regard to the publishers when negotiating publishing
contracts.In order to guarantee thereasonableremuneration of
the use of worksin e-lending, it would be necessary to involve
organisations representingauthorsin the negotiations and
planning of licensing models.Furthermore it would be necessary
to adopt the principle of reasonable remuneration in the EU
level.

There is nosignificant amount ofcross-border e-lending activity.

[In particular if you are an institutional user:]What
differences do you see in the management of physical and online
collections, including providing access to your subscribers?
What problems have you encountered?

[In particular if you are a right holder:]What difference do you
see betweenlibraries’traditional activities such as on-premises
consultation or public lending and activities such as
off-premises (online, at a distance) consultation and
e-lending? What problems have you encountered?

With regard to the analogue book productslending is not a part
of the primary market of publishers. Meanwhile in the digital
environment publishers areincreasinglyproviding similar types
ofproducts and services.Sellingelectronicaccess to copyright
protected works is becoming an essential part of the
publishers’primarybusiness model in the digital
environment.Thereisoverlapping with the primary market of
e-books and e-lending from
libraries.E-lendingthereforepotentially establishes athreat to
the publishers market of e-books.

Thepossibilityof e-lending from libraries shouldand
isbeingprovided throughlicensingbetween publishers and
libraries. It is essential for the organisations
representingauthorsto beinvolvedin negotiations of licensing
schemesin order to guaranteebalanced solutions andfair
remuneration.

Mass digitisation

The term “mass digitisation” is normally used to refer to
efforts by institutions such as libraries and archives to
digitise (e.g. scan) the entire content or part of their
collections with an objective to preserve these collections
and, normally, to make them available to the public. Examples
are efforts by libraries to digitise novels form the early part
of the 20thcentury or whole collections of pictures of
historical value. This matter has been partly addressed at the
EU level by the 2011 Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) on key
principles on the digitisationand making available of out
of commerce works (i.e. works which are no longer found in the
normal channels of commerce),whichisaimingto facilitatemass
digitisation efforts (for books and learned journals) on the
basis of licence agreements between libraries and similar
cultural institutions on the one hand and the collecting
societies representing authors and publishers on the other36

You will find more information about his MoU on the following
website:http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/copyright/out-of-commerce/index_en.htm.

.Provided the required funding is ensured(digitisation projects
are extremely expensive),the result of this MoU should bethat
books that are currently to be found only in the archives of,
for instance, libraries will be digitised and made available
online to everyone.The MoU is based on voluntary licences
(granted by Collective Management Organisations on the basis of
the mandates they receive from authors and publishers). Some
Member States may need to enact legislation to ensure the
largest possible effect ofsuchlicences (e.g. by establishing in
legislation a presumption of representation of a collecting
society or the recognition of an “extended effect” to the
licences granted)37

France and Germany have already adopted legislation to back the
effects of the MoU.The French act (LOI n° 2012-287 du 1er mars
2012 relative à l'exploitation numérique des livres
indisponibles du xxe siècle) foresees collectivemanagement,
unless the author or publisher in question opposes such
management.The German act (Gesetz zur Nutzung verwaister und
vergriffener Werke und einer weiteren Änderung des
Urheberrechtsgesetzes vom 1.Oktober 2013) contains a legal
presumption of representation by a collectingsociety in
relation to works whose rightholdersare not members of the
collecting society.

.

[In particular if you are an institutional user,engaging or
wanting to engage in mass digitisation projects,a
rightholder,acollective management organisation:]Woulditbe
necessaryin your country to enact legislationto ensure
thattheresults of the 2011 MoU (i.e. the agreements concluded
between libraries and collecting societies) havea cross-border
effect sothatout of commerce workscan be accessedacross the EU?

XNO OPINION

Would it be necessary to develop mechanisms, beyond those
already agreed for other typesof content (e.g.for audio- or
audio-visual collections, broadcasters’ archives)?

XNO OPINION

Teaching

Directive 2001/29/EC38

Article 5(3)aof Directive 2001/29.

enables Member States to implement in their national
legislationlimitations and exceptionsfor the purpose of
illustration fornon-commercialteaching. Such exceptions would
typically allow a teacher to use parts of or full works to
illustrate his course,e.g.by distributing copies of fragments
of a book or of newspaper articles in the classroom orby
showing protected content on a smart boardwithout having to
obtain authorisation from the right holders.The open
formulation of this (optional) provision allows for rather
different implementation at Member States level.The
implementation of the exception differs from Member State to
Member State, with several Member States providinginsteada
framework for the licensing of contentforcertain
educationaluses. Some argue that the lawshould provide for
better possibilities for distance learningand study at home.

(a)[In particular if youare an enduser/consumeror an
institutional user:]Have you experienced specific problems when
trying to use works orother subject-matter for illustration for
teaching, including across borders?

(b)[In particular if youarearight holder:]Have
youexperiencedspecificproblems resulting from the wayin
whichworks or other subject-matter are used for illustration
for teaching, including across borders?

XNO

There are no specific problems. The system ofextendedcollective
licensing works well. It enables flexible use of copyright
materials in illustration of teaching while also guaranteeing a
fair remuneration for the use of works.

If there are problems, how wouldtheybestbe solved?

There are no specific problems requiring legislative activity.
The current collective licensing system can be developed in the
framework of current legislation. There is no need to establish
an exception or limitation to the benefit of teaching. Such an
exception would compromise the existence of commercial
publishing of education materials. It would conflict with the
normal use of works and unduly prejudice rights of the
rightholder.

What mechanisms exist in the market place to facilitate the use
of content for illustration for teaching purposes?How
successful are they?

Theextendedcollective licensing scheme is established in the
Finnish Copyright Actsection26§. The Ministry of Educationand
Culturenegotiates licensing schemes together with publishers
and provides the licenses to the ground schools. The licenses
allow photocopying and printing from digital sources. Also a
separate license is provided to allow digital copying.The use
of works in teaching is already broadly allowed inthe framework
of these licenses.

Inaddition to theextendedcollective licensing scheme, there is
an exception for teaching in the Finnish Copyright Actsection
21§which allows performing a published work in teaching. A
published work may be performed in connection with education
(the only exception is cinematographic works).

It is our understandingthat the current exceptions provide
sufficient possibilities for illustration of teaching.

If your view is that a legislative solution is needed, what
would be its main elements? Which activities of the beneficiary
institutions should be coveredand underwhatconditions?

Our positive experiences indicatethat it might be beneficial to
research whether some form ofthe system of extended collective
licensing could be applied in otherMember States as well.

If your view is thatadifferent solutionisneeded, what would it
be?

As it was provided in our answers above there is no need for any
legislative activity in order to enable illustration for
teaching. The current system based onextendedcollective
licensing works well from the point of view of both the right
holders and the users of the works.

Any developments within the collective licensing system may be
undertaken in the framework of the current legislation. There
is no need to establish ageneralmandatoryexception to
benefitofteaching on Community level.

Research

Directive 2001/29/EC39

Article 5(3)a of Directive 2001/29.

enables Member States to choose whether to implement in their
national laws a limitation for the purpose of non-commercial
scientific research.Theopenformulation of this (optional)
provision allows forratherdifferent implementationsat Member
States level.

(a)[In particular if you arean enduser/consumeror an
institutional user:]Haveyou experienced specific problems when
trying to use works or other subject matter in thecontextof
research projects/activities, including across borders?

(b)[In particular if you area right
holder:]Haveyouexperiencedspecificproblemsresulting from the
wayin whichworks or other subject-matter are usedin
thecontextof research projects/activities, including across
borders?

XNO

Thereare solutions available similar to the ones provided for
teaching.

There is no need to adopt any comprehensive limitation for the
purpose of non-commercial scientific research.

If there are problems, how wouldtheybestbe solved?

What mechanisms exist in the Member States to facilitate the use
of content for research purposes?How successful are they?

Disabilities

Directive 2001/29/EC40

Article 5 (3)b of Directive 2001/29.

provides for an exception/limitation for the benefit of people
with a disability.The open formulation of this (optional)
provision allows for rather different implementationsat Member
States level.At EU and international level projects have been
launched to increase the accessibilityof works and other
subject-matterforpersons with disabilities (notably by
increasing the number of works published in special formats and
facilitating their distribution across the European Union)41

The European Trusted Intermediaries Network (ETIN)resulting
froma Memorandum of Understanding betweenrepresentatives of the
right-holder community (publishers, authors, collecting
societies) and interested parties such as associations for
blind and dyslexic
persons(http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/copyright/initiatives/access/index_en.htm)
and the Trusted Intermediary Global Accessible Resources (TIGAR)
project in WIPO (http://www.visionip.org/portal/en/).

.

The Marrakesh Treaty42

MarrakeshTreaty to Facilitate Access to Published Works by
Visually Impaired Persons and Persons with Print
Disabilities,Marrakesh, June 17 to 282013.

has been adopted to facilitate access to published works for
persons who are blind, visually impaired, or otherwise print
disabled. The Treaty creates a mandatory exception to copyright
that allows organisations for the blind to produce, distribute
and make available accessible format copies to visually
impaired persons without the authorisation of the rightholders.
The EU and its Member Stateshave startedwork to sign and ratify
the Treaty. This may require the adoption of certain provisions
at EU level (e.g. to ensure the possibility to exchange
accessible format copies across borders).

(a)[Inparticular if you are a person with a disability or an
organisation representing persons with disabilities:]Have you
experienced problems with accessibility to content, including
across borders,arising from Member States’ implementation of
this exception?

(b)[Inparticular if you are an organisationproviding services
for persons with disabilities:]Have you experienced problems
when distributing/communicating works published in special
formats across the EU?

(c)[In particular if you are arightholder:]Have you
experiencedspecificproblems resulting fromthe application of
limitations or exceptions allowing for the
distribution/communication of works published in special
formats, including across borders?

XNO

Therehas been no specific problem with regard to application of
limitations and exceptions todistribute works published in
special formats.In general the Marrakesh Treaty to facilitate
access to published works for persons with disabilities is
welcomed. There should be no mandatory harmonization on the EU
level. The more detailed questions regarding adoption should be
left in the discretion of the competent national authorities.

The exception should not be applied in case there are commercial
alternatives available. Any harmonizing legislation on the EU
level should not restrict the possibility of organizing such
facilities through public funding.

Ifthere are problems, what could be done to improve
accessibility?

What mechanisms exist in the market place to facilitate
accessibility to content? How successful are they?

Copies of apublished literary work, a published musical work or
a published work of fine art may be made available to people
with visual impairments and others who, owing to a disability
or illness, cannot use the works in the ordinary manner.
Institutions entitled to make copies of a work are determined
by a Government Decree. The institutions do not seek commercial
or economic gain and the institution provides services to
persons with disabilities and that the institution has the
financial and operational facilities to pursue such activity.
The author has a right to remuneration for the making of copies
for sale or the communication of a work to a disabled person.

Text and data mining

Text and data mining/content mining/data analytics43

For the purpose of the present document, the term “text and data
mining” will be used.

are different terms used to describe increasingly important
techniques used in particular by researchers for the
exploration of vastamounts of existing texts and data (e.g.,
journals, web sites, databases etc.). Through the use of
software or other automated processes, an analysis is made of
relevant texts and data in order to obtain new insights,
patterns and trends.

The texts and data used for mining are either freely accessible
on the internet or accessible through subscriptions to e.g.
journals and periodicals that give access to the databases of
publishers. A copy is made of the relevant texts and data (e.g.
on browser cache memories or in computers RAM memories or onto
the hard disk of a computer), prior to the actual analysis.
Normally, it is considered that to mine protected works or
other subject matter, it is necessary to obtain authorisation
fromtherightholdersfor the making of such copiesunless such
authorisation can be implied (e.g. content accessible to
general public without restrictions on the internet,
openaccess).

Some argue that the copies required for text and data mining are
covered by the exception for temporary copies in Article 5.1 of
Directive 2001/29/EC. Others consider that text and data mining
activities should not even be seen as covered by copyright. None
of thisis clear, in particular since text and data mining does
not consist only of a single method, but can be undertaken in
several different ways. Important questions also remain as to
whether the main problems arising in relation to this issue go
beyond copyright (i.e. beyond the necessity or not to obtain
the authorisation to use content) and relate rather to the need
to obtain “access” to content (i.e. being able to use e.g.
commercial databases).

A specific Working Group was set up on this issue in the
framework of the "Licences for Europe" stakeholder dialogue. No
consensus was reached among participating stakeholders on either
the problems to be addressed or the results. At the same time,
practical solutions to facilitate text and data mining of
subscription-based scientific content were presented by
publishers as an outcome of “Licences for Europe”44

See the document “Licences for Europe – tenpledges to bring more
content
online”:http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/copyright/docs/licences-for-europe/131113_ten-pledges_en.pdf.

.In the context of these discussions, other stakeholders argued
that no additional licences should be required to mine material
to which access has been provided through a
subscriptionagreement and considered that a specific exception
for text and data mining should beintroduced, possibly on the
basis of a distinction between commercial and non-commercial.

(a)[In particular if you are an enduser/consumeror an
institutional user:]Haveyou experiencedobstacles,linked to
copyright,when trying to usetext or data miningmethods,
including across borders?

(b)[In particular if you are aservice provider:]Have you
experienced obstacles, linked to copyright, when providing
services based on text or data mining methods, including across
borders?

(c)[In particular if you are a rightholder:]Have you
experiencedspecificproblems resulting fromthe useof textand
data mining in relation to copyright protected content,
including across borders?

XNO–Please explain

These issues can be solved by direct licensing by the right
holders or by extended collective license.There is no need to
limit the right of the right holder to determine conditions of
exploitation of the work.

If there are problems, how wouldtheybestbe solved?

If your view is that a legislative solution is needed, what
would be its main elements? Which activities should be
coveredand underwhatconditions?

If your view is thatadifferent solutionisneeded, what would it
be?

Are there other issues, unrelated to copyright, that constitute
barriers to the use of text or data mining methods?

User-generated content

Technological and service developments mean that citizens can
copy, use and distribute content at little to no financial
cost. As a consequence, new types of online activities are
developing rapidly, including the making of so-called
“user-generated content”. While users can create totally
original content,theycan also take one or several pre-existing
works, change somethinginthe work(s), and upload the result on
the Internet e.g. to platforms and blogs45

A typical example could be the “kitchen” or “wedding” video
(adding one's own video to a pre-existing sound recording), or
adding one's own text to a pre-existing photograph.Other
examples are “mash-ups” (blending two sound recordings), and
reproducing parts of journalistic work (report, review etc.) in
a blog.

. User-generated content (UGC) can thus coverthe modification of
pre-existing works even if the newly-generated/"uploaded" work
does notnecessarilyrequire a creative effort and results from
merely adding, subtracting or associating some pre-existing
content with other pre-existing content. This kind ofactivityis
not “new” as such. However, the development of social networking
and social media sitesthatenable users to share content widely
has vastly changed the scale of such activities and increased
the potential economic impact forthose holding rights inthe
pre-existing works. Re-use is no longer the preserve of
a technically and artistically adept elite. With the
possibilities offered by the new technologies,re-use is open to
all, at no cost.This in turn raises questionswith regard to
fundamental rights suchthe freedom of expression and theright
to property.

A specific Working Group was set up on this issue in the
framework of the"Licences for Europe" stakeholder dialogue. No
consensuswas reachedamong participating stakeholders on either
the problems tobe addressed or the resultsor even the
definition of UGC.Nevertheless, awide range of viewswere
presentedas to the best way to respond to this phenomenon.
Oneviewwasto say that a new exception is needed to cover UGC,in
particular non-commercial activities by individuals such as
combining existing musical works with videos, sequences of
photos, etc.Anotherview wasthat no legislative change is
needed: UGC is flourishing, and licensing schemes are
increasingly available (licence schemes concluded between
rightholders and platforms as well as micro-licences concluded
between rightholders and the usersgenerating thecontent. In any
event, practical solutions to ease user-generated content and
facilitate micro-licensing for small users werepledgedby
rightholders across different sectors as a result of the
“Licences for Europe” discussions46

See the document “Licences for Europe – tenpledges to bring more
content
online”:http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/copyright/docs/licences-for-europe/131113_ten-pledges_en.pdf.

.

(a)[In particular if you are an enduser/consumer:]Have you
experienced problems when trying to use pre-existing works or
other subject matter to disseminate new content on the
Internet, including across borders?

(b)[In particular if you are aservice provider:]Have you
experienced problems when users publish/disseminatenew content
based on the pre-existing works or other subject-matter through
your service, including across borders?

(c)[In particular if you are a right holder:]Have you
experiencedproblems resulting from the waythe usersare using
pre-existing works or other subject-matter to disseminate new
content on the Internet, including across borders?

XNO

The Finnish copyright act includes provisionsallowingthe
alteration of a specific workfor example in a parody or
satirical manner.Essential problem is the unauthorized use of
copyright protected materials to create user generated content.
There might be problems arising with regard to the moral rights
of the right holder.

(a)[In particular if you are an end user/consumer or aright
holder:]Have you experienced problems when trying to ensure
that the work you have created (on the basis of pre-existing
works) is properly identified for online use?Are proprietary
systems sufficient in this context?

(b)[In particular if you are a service provider:]Do you provide
possibilities for users that are publishing/disseminating the
works they have created (on the basis of pre-existing works)
through your service to properly identify these works for
online use?

(a)[In particular if you are an enduser/consumeror aright
holder):]Have you experienced problems when trying to be
remunerated for the use of the work you have created (on the
basis of pre-existing works)?

(b)[In particular if you are a service provider:]Do you provide
remuneration schemes for users publishing/disseminating the
works they have created (on the basis of pre-existing works)
through your service?

If there are problems, how would theybestbe solved?

If your view is that a legislative solution is needed, what
would be its main elements? Which activities should be
coveredand underwhatconditions?

No legislative activity is needed.Nothing indicates that there
would be a need to adopt any type of mandatory exceptions on
the Community level.See Q 58.

If your view is thatadifferent solutionisneeded, what would it
be?

Private copying and reprography

Directive 2001/29/EC enables Member States to implement in their
national legislation exceptions or limitations to the
reproduction right for copies made for private useand
photocopying47

Article 5. 2)(a) and (b)of Directive 2001/29.

.Levies are charges imposed at national level on goods typically
used forsuch purposes(blank media, recording equipment,
photocopying machines, mobile listening devices such as mp3/mp4
players, computers, etc.) with a viewtocompensating rightholders
forthe harm they suffer whencopiesaremade
withouttheirauthorisation by certain categories of persons
(i.e. natural persons making copies for their private use)
orthroughuse of certain technique (i.e. reprography).In that
context, levies are importantforrightholders.

With the constant developments in digital technology, the
question arises as to whether the copying of files
byconsumers/end-userswho have purchasedcontent online -e.g.
when a person has bought an MP3 fileandgoes on
tostoremultiplecopies of thatfile(in her computer, her tablet
and her mobile phone)-alsotriggers, or should trigger,the
application of private copying levies. It is argued that, in
some cases,these leviesmay indeedbe claimedby
rightholderswhetheror notthelicence feepaid by the service
provideralready covers copies made bythe enduser.
Thisapproachcould potentially lead to instances of double
payments whereby levies could be claimed on top ofservice
providers’licencefees48

Communication "Unleashing the Potential of Cloud Computing in
Europe", COM(2012) 529 final.

49

These issues were addressed in the recommendations of Mr António
Vitorino resulting from the mediation on private copying and
reprography levies.Youcan consult these recommendationson the
following
website:http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/copyright/docs/levy_reform/130131_levies-vitorino-recommendations_en.pdf.

.

There is also an on-going discussion as to the application or
not of levies to certain types ofcloud-based services such as
personal lockers or personal video recorders.

In your view, is there a need to clarifyat the EU levelthe scope
and application of theprivate copyingand reprographyexceptions50

Art. 5.2(a) and 5.2(b) of Directive 2001/29/EC.

in the digital environment?

X NO

There is no need to adopt clarifying legislationon EU level.
Issue can be dealt with on the national level.

Should digital copies made by end users for private purposes in
the context of a service that has been licensed by
rightholders, and where theharmto the rightholder is minimal,
be subject to private copying levies?51

This issue was also addressed in the recommendations of Mr
Antonio Vitorino resulting from the mediation on private
copying and reprography levies

X YES

How wouldchanges inlevieswith respect to the application
toonline services (e.g.services based oncloud computing
allowing, for instance,usersto have copieson different
devices)impactthe development and functioning ofnewbusiness
modelson the one hand and rightholders’ revenue on the other?

The medium used for private copying should not be decisive
matter.

Would you see an added value in making levies visibleon the
invoices for products subject to levies?52

This issue was also addressed in the recommendations of Mr
Antonio Vitorino resulting from the mediation on private
copying and reprography levies.

XNO OPINION

Divergingnational systems levy different products and apply
different tariffs. This results in obstacles tothefree
circulation of goods and servicesin the Single Market.At the
same time, many Member States continue to
allowtheindiscriminate application of private copying levies to
all transactions irrespective of the person to whom the product
subject to a levyis sold(e.g. private person or business). In
that context, not all Member States have ex anteexemption
and/orex post reimbursement schemes which could remedy these
situations and reduce the number of undue payments53

This issue was also addressed in the recommendations of Mr
Antonio Vitorino resulting from the mediation on private
copying and reprography levies.

.

Have you experienced a situation whereacross-border transaction
resulted inundue levy payments, or duplicate payments of the
same levy, or other obstacles to the free movement of goods or
services?

What percentage of products subject to a levy is sold to persons
other than natural persons for purposes clearly unrelated to
private copying? Do any of those transactions result in undue
payments? Please explain in detail the example you provide
(type of products, type of transaction, stakeholders, etc.).

Where such undue payments arise, what percentage of trade do
they affect? To what extent could a priori exemptionsand/orex
post reimbursement schemes existingin some Member Stateshelp to
remedy the situation?

Ifyou have identified specificproblemswith the
currentfunctioning of thelevy system, howwouldthese
problemsbestbesolved?

Fairremuneration of authors and performers

TheEUcopyrightacquisrecognises for authors and performers a
number of exclusive rights and, in the case of performers whose
performances are fixed in phonograms, remuneration rights. There
are few provisions in the EU copyright law governing
thetransferof rights from authors or performers to producers54

See e.g. Directive 92/100/EEC, Art.2(4)-(7).

or determining who the owner of the rights is when the work or
other subject matter is created in the context ofanemployment
contract55

See e.g.Art. 2.3. of Directive 2009/24/EC,Art. 4 of Directive
96/9/EC.

.Thisis an area that has been traditionally left for Member
States to regulate and there are significant differences in
regulatory approaches.Substantial differences also existbetween
differentsectors ofthecreative industries.

Concerns continue to be raised that authors and performers are
not adequately remunerated, in particularbut not solely, as
regards online exploitation. Many consider that the economic
benefit of new forms of exploitation is not being fairly shared
along the whole value chain. Another commonly raised issue
concerns contractual practices, negotiation mechanisms,
presumptions of transfer of rights, buy-out clauses and the
lack of possibility to terminate contracts. Some stakeholders
are of the opinion that rules atnational leveldonotsuffice to
improve their situation and that action at EU level is
necessary.

[In particular if you arean author/performer:] What is the best
mechanism (or combination of mechanisms) to ensurethatyou
receive an adequate remuneration for the exploitation of your
works and performances?

It is not possiblefor a single author to gain a balanced
position in the negotiations with publishers and producers.The
law should provide a framework for a balanced genuine
negotiation situation. In specific, there should be a legal
safeguard of fair remuneration and other minimum conditions in
order to create more balance in the negotiation situation.

Istherea need to actat theEU level (for instance to prohibit
certain clauses in contracts)?

XYES–Please explain

The right to fair remuneration should beadopted in the
harmonizing legislation atthe EU level. All types of abusive
contractual conditions should be prohibitedin order to
guarantee balanced negotiation positions.

Ifyou consider that the current rules are not effective, what
would you suggest to addresstheshortcomingsyou identify?

The GermanAct on Copyright and Related Rights (Copyright Act)can
be considered to provide adequate safeguards for the reasonable
remuneration. The model includes a provision of joint
remuneration agreements, and a bestseller clause.

Respectforrights

Directive 2004/48/EE56

Directive 2004/48/EC of the European Parliament and of the
Council of 29 April 2004 on the enforcement of intellectual
property rights.

provides for a harmonised framework for the civil enforcement of
intellectual property rights, including copyright and related
rights. The Commission has consulted broadly on this text57

You will find more information on the following
website:http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/iprenforcement/directive/index_en.htm

. Concerns have been raised as to whether some of its provisions
are still fit to ensure a proper respectforcopyright in the
digital age. On the one hand, the current measures seem to be
insufficient to deal with the new challenges brought by the
dissemination of digital content on the internet; on the other
hand, there are concerns about the current balance between
enforcement of copyright and the protection of fundamental
rights, in particular the right for a private life and data
protection. While it cannot be contested that enforcement
measures should always be available in caseofinfringement of
copyright, measures could be proposed to strengthen respect for
copyright when the infringed content is used for a commercial
purpose58

For example when the infringing content is offered on a website
which gets advertising revenues that depend on the volume of
traffic.

. One means to do this could be to clarify the role of
intermediaries in the IP infrastructure59

This clarification should not affect the liability regime of
intermediary service providers established by Directive
2000/31/EC on electronic commerce, which will remain unchanged.

. At the same time,there could beclarification of the
safeguardsforrespect of private life and data protection for
private users.

Shouldthe civil enforcement system in the EU be rendered more
efficient for infringements of copyright committed with a
commercial purpose?

XYES–Please explain

Piracy should be combated to help the legal marketplace to
evolve. There is not much reason to invest into legal ways to
produce content as long as there is a must to compete with
illegal options that do not compensate the rightholders and pay
taxes.

The best way to combat piracy is to co-operate in the EU and
international level. If there is an illegal service
distributing illegal content in the internet it affects the
market not only in the country of origin of the service but
also in other countries.

In particular,isthe current legal framework clear enough to
allow forsufficient involvement of intermediaries (such as
Internet service providers, advertising brokers, payment
service providers, domain name registrars, etc.) in inhibiting
online copyright infringements with a commercial purpose? If
not, whatmeasureswould be useful to foster the cooperation of
intermediaries?

In order to reduce piracy isnecessarythat the intermediaries are
involved and in collaboration with the rightholders.Domain name
registrations and its ownership should be public and that the
domain name registrarsshould have the obligation to verify the
identity of the person registering the specific domain name.
The advertising brokers should also prevent from selling
advertises to sites clearly distributing illegal content and
payment service providers should prevent from co-operating with
these sites. The ISPs preventing traffic to illegal sites would
be also welcomed.

Does the current civil enforcement framework ensure that the
right balance is achieved between the right to have one’s
copyright respected and other rights such as the
protectionofprivate life and protection of personal data?

XYES–Please explain

Yes, there is a balance between copyright protection and other
fundamental rights and it should be maintained.

AsingleEU CopyrightTitle

The idea ofestablishing aunifiedEU CopyrightTitlehas
beenpresentin the copyright debate for quite some time
now,although views as to the merits andthefeasibility of suchan
objectiveare divided.Aunified EUCopyrightTitlewouldtotally
harmonise the area of copyright law in the EU and replace
national laws. There would then be a single EU title instead of
a bundle of national rights.Some seethisas the only manner in
which a truly Single Market for content protected by copyright
can be ensured,whileothersbelieve that the same
objectivecanbetterbe achieved by establishing a higher level of
harmonisation while allowing for a certain degree of flexibility
and specificity in Member States’legal systems.

ShouldtheEU pursue the establishment of asingle
EUCopyrightTitle,as a means of establishing a consistent
framework for rights and exceptions to copyright across the EU,
as well as a single framework for enforcement?

XNO

Should this be the next step in the development of copyright in
the EU? Does the current level of difference among the Member
State legislation mean that this is a longer term project?

Other issues

The above questionnaire aimstoprovidea comprehensive
consultation on the most important matters relating to the
current EU legal framework for copyright.Shouldany important
matters have been omitted,we would appreciate if you could
bring them to our attention, so they can be properly addressed
in the future.

Are there any other important matters related to the EU legal
framework forcopyright?Pleaseexplainandindicatehow such matters
should be addressed.

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

