


Public Consultationonthe review oftheEUcopyright rules

Contents

Introduction  2

Context of the consultation  2

How to submit replies to this questionnaire  3

Confidentiality  3

Rights and the functioning of the Single Market  7

Why is it not possible to access many online content services
from anywhere in Europe?  7

Is there a need for more clarity as regards the scope of what
needs to beauthorised (or not) in digital transmissions?  10

The act of "making available"  11

Two rights involved in a single act of exploitation  12

Linking and browsing  12

Download to own digital content  14

Registration of works and other subject matter-is it a good
idea?  15

How to improve the use and interoperability of identifiers  17

Term of protection-is it appropriate?  17

Limitations and exceptions inthe Single Market  18

Access to content in libraries and archives  21

Preservation and archiving  22

Off-premises access to library collections  23

E-lending  24

Mass digitisation  25

Teaching  26

Research  27

Disabilities  28

Text and data mining  29

User-generated content  31

Private copying and reprography  34

Fair remuneration of authors and performers  37

Respect for rights  39

A singleEUCopyright Title  40

Other issues  41

I.Introduction

A. Context of the consultation

Over the last two decades, digital technology and the Internet
have reshaped the ways in which content is created,
distributed, and accessed. New opportunities have materialised
for those that create and produce content (e.g. a film, a
novel, a song), for new and existing distribution platforms,
for institutions such as libraries, for activities such as
research and for citizens who now expect to be able to access
content-for information, education or entertainment
purposes-regardless of geographical borders.

This new environment also presentschallenges. One of them is for
the market to continue to adapt to new forms of distribution and
use. Another one is for the legislator to ensure that the system
of rights, limitations to rights and enforcement remains
appropriate and is adapted to the newenvironment. This
consultation focuses on the second of these challenges:
ensuring that theEUcopyright regulatory framework stays fit for
purpose in the digital environment to support creation and
innovation, tap the full potential of the Single Market,foster
growth and investment in our economy and promote cultural
diversity.

In its "Communication on Content in the Digital Single Market"1

COM(2012)789final,18/12/2012.

the Commission set out two parallel tracks of action: on the one
hand, to complete its on-going effort to review and to modernise
theEUcopyright legislative framework2

"Based on market studies and impact assessment and legal
drafting work"as announced in the Communication

789.

with a view to a decision in2014on whether to table legislative
reform proposals, and on the other, to facilitate practical
industry- led solutions through the stakeholder dialogue
"Licences for Europe" on issues on which rapid progress was
deemed necessary and possible.

The "Licences for Europe" process has been finalised now3

See the document "Licences for Europe-templedges to bring more
content
online":http://ec.europa.eu/intemalmarket/copyright/docs/licences-for-europe/131113
ten-pledges en.pdf.

. The Commission welcomes the practical solutions stakeholders
have put forward in this context and will monitor their
progress. Pledges have been made by stakeholders in all four
Working Groups (cross border portability of services,
user-generated content, audiovisual and film heritage and text
and data mining). Taken together, the Commission expects these
pledges to be a further step in making the user environment
easier in many different situations. The Commission also takes
note of the factthat two groups-user-generated content and text
and data mining-did not reach consensus among participating
stakeholders on either the problems to be addressed or on the
results. The discussions and results of "Licences for Europe"
will be also taken into account in the context of the review of
the legislative framework.

As part of the review process, the Commission is now launching a
public consultation on issues identified in the Communication on
Content in the Digital Single Market, i.e.:"territoriality in
the Internal Market,harmonisation,limitations and exceptions to
copyright in the digital age; fragmentation of theEUcopyright
market; and how toimprove the effectiveness and efficiency of
enforcement while underpinning its legitimacy in the
widercontext of copyright reform".As highlighted in the
October2013European Council

Conclusions4

EUCO169/13, 24/25October2013.

"Providingdigital services and contentacross thesinglemarket
requires the establishment of a copyright regime for the
digital age. The Commission will therefore complete its
on-going review of theEUcopyright framework in spring2014.It is
important to modernise Europe'scopyright regime and facilitate
licensing, while ensuring a high level protection of
intellectual property rights and taking into account cultural
diversity".

This consultation builds onprevious consultations and public
hearings, in particular those on the "Green Paper on copyright
in the knowledge economy"5

COM(2008)466/3,http://ec.europa.eu/internalmarket/copyright/copyright-infso/index
en.htm#maincontentSec2.

, the "Green Paper on the online distribution of audiovisual
works"6

COM(2011)
427final,http://ec.europa.eu/internalmarket/consultations/2011/audiovisual
en.htm.

and "Content Online"7

http://ec.europa.eu/internalmarket/consultations/2009/content
online en.htm.

. These consultations provided valuable feedback from
stakeholders on a number of questions, on issues as diverse
asthe territoriality of copyright and possible ways to overcome
territoriality, exceptions related to the online dissemination
of knowledge, and rightholders' remuneration, particularly in
the audiovisual sector. Views were expressed by stakeholders
representing all stages in the value chain, including right
holders, distributors, consumers, and academics. The questions
elicited widely diverging views on the best way to proceed. The
"Green Paper on Copyright in the Knowledge Economy" was followed
up by a Communication. The replies to the "Green Paper on the
online distribution of audiovisual works" have fed into
subsequent discussions on the Collective Rights Management
Directive and into the current review process.

How to submit replies to this questionnaire

You are kindly asked to send your repliesby5February2014in a MS
Word, PDF or OpenDocument format to the following e-mail
address of DG Internal Market and
Services:markt-copyright-consultation@ec.europa.eu.Please note
that replies sent after that date will not be taken into
account.

This consultation is addressed to different categories of
stakeholders. To the extent possible, the questions indicate
the category/ies of respondents most likely to be concerned by
them (annotation in brackets, before the actual question).
Respondents should nevertheless feel free to reply to any/all
of the questions. Also, please note that, apart from the
question concerning theidentificationof the respondent, none of
the questions is obligatory. Replies containing answers only to
part of the questions will be also accepted.

You are requested to provide your answers directly within this
consultation document. For the "Yes/No/No opinion" questions
please put the selected answer inboldandunderlineit so it is
easy for us to see your selection.

In your answers to the questions, you are invited to refer to
the situation inEUMemberStates.You are also invited in
particular to indicate, where relevant, what would be the
impact of options you put forward in terms of costs,
opportunities and revenues.

The public consultation is available in English. Responses may,
however, be sent in any of the24official languages of theEU.

Confidentiality

The contributions received in this round of consultation as well
as a summary report presenting the responses in a statistical
and aggregated form will be published on the website ofDG
MARKT.

Please note that all contributions received will be published
together with the identity of the contributor, unless the
contributor objects to the publication of their personal data
on the grounds that such publication would harm his or her
legitimate interests. In this case, the contribution will be
published in anonymous form upon the contributor's explicit
request. Otherwise the contribution will not be published nor
will its content be reflected in the summary report.

Please read ourPrivacy statement.

PLEASE IDENTIFY YOURSELF:

Name:

In the interests of transparency, organisations (including, for
example,NGOs,trade associations and commercialenterprises) are
invited to provide the public with relevant information about
themselves by registering in the Interest Representative
Register and subscribing to its Code of Conduct.

•If you are a Registered organisation, please indicate your
RegisterID number below. Your contribution will then be
considered as representing the views of your organisation.

•If your organisation is not registered, you have the
opportunity toregister now. Responses from organisations not
registered will be published separately.

If you would like to submit your reply on an anonymous basis
please indicate it belowby underlining the following answer:

•Yes, I would like to submit my reply on an anonymous basis

TYPE OF RESPONDENT(Pleaseunderlinethe appropriate):

€End user/consumer(e.g. internet user, reader, subscriber to
music or audiovisual service, researcher, student)OR
Representative of end users/consumers

^ for the purposes of thisquestionnaire normally referred to in
questions as"end users/consumers"

€Institutional user(e.g. school, university, research centre,
library, archive)OR Representative of institutional users

^ for the purposes of this questionnaire normally referredto in
questions as"institutional users"

€Author/Performer OR Representative of authors/performers

€ Publisher/Producer/Broadcaster  OR  Representative  of

publishers/producers/broadcasters

^the two above categoriesare, for the purposes of this
questionnaire, normally referred to in questions as"right
holders"

€Intermediary/Distributor/Other service provider(e.g. online
music or audiovisual service, games platform, social media,
search engine, ICT industry)OR Representative of
intermediaries/distributors/other service providers

^ for the purposes of this questionnaire normally referred to in
questions as"service providers"

€ Collective Management Organisation

€ Public authority

€ Member State

€ Other(Please explain):

II.Rightsand the functioning of the Single Market

A. Why is it not possible to access many online content services
from anywhere in Europe?

[The territorial scope of the rights involved in digital
transmissions and the segmentation of the market through
licensing agreements]

Holders of copyright and related rights-e.g. writers, singers,
musicians-do not enjoy a single protection in theEU.Instead,
they are protectedon the basis of a bundle of national rights
in each Member State. Those rights have been largely harmonised
by the existingEUDirectives. However, differences remain and the
geographical scope of the rights is limited to the territory of
the Member Stategranting them. Copyright is thus territorial in
the sense that rights are acquired and enforced on a
country-by-country basis under national law8

This principle has been confirmed by the Court of justice on
several occasions.

.

The dissemination of copyright-protected content on the
Internet-e.g. by a music streaming service, or by an online
e-book seller-therefore requires, in principle, an
authorisation for each national territory in which the content
is communicated to the public. Rightholders are,of course, in a
position to grant a multi-territorial or pan-European licence,
such that content services can be provided in several Member
States and across borders. A number of steps have been taken at
EU level to facilitate multi-territorial licences:the proposal
for a Directive on Collective Rights Management9

Proposal for a Directive of the European Parliament and of the
Council of11July2012on collective management ofcopyright and
related rights and multi-territorial licensing of rights in
musical works for online uses in the internal market,
COM(2012)372final.

should significantly facilitate the delivery
ofmulti­territoriallicences in musical works for online
services10

Collective Management Organisations play a significant role in
the management of online rights for musical works in contrast
to the situation where online rights are licensed directly by
right holders such as film or record producers or by newspaper
or book publishers.

; the structured stakeholder dialogue "Licences for Europe"11

You can find more information on the following
website:http://ec.europa.eu/licences-for-europe-dialogue/.

and market-led developments such as the on-going work in the
Linked Content Coalition12

You can find more information on the following
website:http://www.hnkedcontentcoalition.org/.

.

"Licences for Europe" addressed in particular the specific issue
of cross-border portability, i.e. the ability of consumers
having subscribed to online services in their Member State to
keep accessing them when travelling temporarily to other Member
States. As a result, representatives of the audio-visual sector
issued a joint statement affirming their commitment to continue
working towards the further development of cross-border
portability13

See the document "Licences for Europe-templedges to bring more
contentonline":http://ec.europa.eu/intemalmarket/copyright/docs/licences-for-europe/131113
ten-pledges en.pdf.

.

Despite progress, there are continued problems with the
cross-border provision of, and access to, services. These
problems are most obvious to consumers wanting to access
services that are made available in Member States other than
the one in which they live. Not all online services are
available in all Member States and consumers face problems when
tryingto access such services across borders. In some instances,
even if the "same" service is available in all Member States,
consumers cannot access the service across borders (they can
only access their "national" service, and if they try to access
the "same" service in another Member State they are redirected
to the one designated for their country of residence).

This situation may in partstem from the territoriality of rights
and difficulties associated with the clearing of rights in
different territories. Contractual clauses in licensing
agreements between right holders and distributors and/or
between distributors and end users may alsobe at the origin of
some of the problems (denial of access, redirection).

The main issue at stake here is, therefore, whether further
measures (legislative ornon­legislative,including market-led
solutions) need to be taken atEUlevel in the medium term14

For possible long term measures such as the establishment of a
European Copyright Code (establishing a single title) see
section VII of this consultation document.

to increase the cross-border availability of content services in
the Single Market, whileensuring an adequate level of protection
for right holders.

1.[Inparticular if you are an end user/consumer:]Have you faced
problems when trying to access online services in anEUMember
State other than the one in which you live?

YES-Please provide examples indicating the Member State, the
sector and the type of content concerned (e.g. premium content
such as certain films and TV series, audio-visual content in
general, music, e-books, magazines, journals and newspapers,
games, applications and other software)

NO

NO OPINION

2.[In particular if you are a service provider:]Have you faced
problems when seeking to provide online services across borders
intheEU?

YES - Please explain whethersuch problems, in your experience,
are related to copyright or to other issues (e.g. business
decisions relating to the cost of providing services across
borders, compliance with other laws such as consumer
protection)? Please provide examples indicatingthe Member
State, the sector and the type of content concerned (e.g.
premium content such as certain films and TV series,
audio-visual content in general, music, e-books, magazines,
journals and newspapers, games, applications and other
software).

NO

NO OPINION

3.[In particular if you are a right holder or a collective
management organisation:]How often are you asked to grant
multi-territorial licences? Please indicate, if possible, the
number of requests per year and provide examples indicating the
Member State, the sector and the type of content concerned.

[Open question]

4.If you have identified problems in the answers to any of the
questions above—what would be the best way to tackle them?

[Open question]

5.[In particular if you are aright holder or a collective
management organisation:]Are there reasons why, even in cases
where you hold all the necessary rights for all the territories
in question, you would still find it necessary or justified to
impose territorial restrictions on aservice provider (in order,
for instance, to ensure that access to certain content is not
possible in certain European countries)?

YES-Please explain by giving examples

NO

NO OPINION

6.[In particular if you are e.g.a broadcaster or a service
provider:]Are there reasons why, even in cases where you have
acquired allthenecessary rights for alltheterritories in
question, you would still find it necessary or justified to
impose territorial restrictions ontheservice recipient (in
order for instance, to redirecttheconsumer to a different
website thantheone he is trying toaccess)?

YES-Please explain by giving examples

NO

NO OPINION

7.Do you think that further measures (legislative or
non-legislative, including market- led solutions) are needed
atEUlevel to increase the cross-border availability of content
services in the Single Market, while ensuring an adequate level
of protection for right holders?

YES-Please explain

NO-Please explain

Il n'y a pas de problème de disponibilité ou d'accessibilité des
œuvres musicales sur internet, quel que soit le pays de
connexion. D'ailleurs la Commission l'a reconnu elle- même
(voir l'initiative "Licences for Europe"). Il ne paraît donc
pas nécessaired'adopter des mesures législatives en matière de
droit d'auteur.

D'ailleurs, la Directive sur la gestion collective dont le but
est de faciliter la délivrance d'autorisations pour
l'exploitation multiterritoriale d'œuvres musicales par
exemple, est sur lepoint d'être adoptée : il semble utile
d'attendre qu'elle produise ses effets avant de légiférer à
nouveau sur cette question.

Mais la vraie question pour les créateurs concerne les moyens
d'obtenir la juste rémunération qui devrait leur revenir en
contrepartie de l'exploitation de leurs œuvres sur internet :
elle n'est pas du tout traitée dans ce questionnaire.

NO OPINION

B.Is thereaneed for more clarity as regards the scope of what
needs to be authorised (or not) in digital transmissions?

[The definition of the rights involved in digital transmissions]

The EU framework fortheprotection of copyright and related
rights in the digital environment is largely established by
Directive 2001/29/EC15

Directive 2001/29/EC of the European Parliament and of the
Council of22May2001on theharmonisationof certain aspects of
copyright and related rights in the information society.

on theharmonisationof certain aspects of copyrightand related
rights in the information society. OtherEUdirectives in this
field that are relevant in the online environment are those
relating to the protection of software16

Directive 2009/24/EC of the European Parliament and of the
Council of23April2009on the legal protection of computer
programs.

and databases17

Directive 96/9/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council
of11March1996on the legal protection of databases.

.

Directive 2001/29/EC harmonises the rights of authors and
neighbouring rightholders18

Film and record producers, performers and broadcasters are
holders of so-called "neighbouring rights" in, respectively,
their films, records, performances and broadcast. Authors'
content protected by copyright is referred to as a "work"or
"works", while content protected by neighbouring rights is
referred to as "other subject matter".

which are essential for the transmission of digital copies of
works (e.g. an e-book) and other protected subject matter (e.g.
a record in a MP3 format) over the internet or similar digital
networks.

The most relevant rights for digital transmissions are the
reproduction right, i.e. the right to authorise or prohibit the
making of copies19

The right to "authorise or prohibit direct or indirect,
temporary orpermanent reproduction by any means and in any
form, in whole or in part" (see Art.2of Directive 2001/29/EC)
although temporary acts of reproduction of a transient or
incidental nature are, under certain conditions, excluded (see
art.5(1)of Directive 2001/29/EC).

, (notably relevant at the start of the transmission-e.g. the
uploading of a digital copy of a work to a server in view of
making it available-and at the users' end-e.g. when a user
downloadsa digital copy of a work) and the communication to the
public/making available right, i.e. the rights to authorise or
prohibit the

dissemination of the works in digital networks20

The right to authorise or prohibit any communication to the
public by wireor wireless means and to authorise or prohibit
the making available to the public "on demand" (see Art.3of
Directive 2001/29/EC).

. These rights are intrinsically linked in digital transmissions
and both need to be cleared.

1.The act of "making available"

Directive 2001/29/EC specifies neitherwhatis covered by the
making available right (e.g. the upload, the accessibility by
the public, the actual reception by the public) norwherethe act
of "making available" takes place. This does not raise questions
if the act is limited to a single territory. Questions arise
however when the transmission covers several territories and
rights need to be cleared (does the act of "making available"
happen in the country of the upload only? in eachof the
countries where the content is potentially accessible? in each
of the countries where the content is effectively accessed?).
The most recent case law of the Court of Justice of the
European Union (CJEU) suggests that a relevant criterion is the
"targeting" of a certain Member State's public21

See in particular Case C-173/11 (Football Dataco
vsSportradar)and Case C-5/11(Donner)for copyright and related
rights, and Case C-324/09(L'Oréalvs eBay) for trademarks. With
regard to jurisdiction see alsojoined Cases C-585/08 and
C-144/09 (Pammer and HotelAlpenhof)and pending
CaseC-441/13(PezHejduk);see however, adopting a different
approach, Case C-170/12 (Pinckney vs KDGMediatech).

. According to this approachthe copyright-relevant act (which
has to be licensed) occurs at least in those countries which
are "targeted" by the online service provider. A service
provider "targets" a group of customers residing in a specific
country when it directs its activity tothat group, e.g. via
advertisement, promotions, a language or a currency
specifically targeted at that group.

8.Is the scope of the"making available"right in cross-border
situations— i.e.when content is disseminated across
borders—sufficiently clear?

YES

NO-Please explain how this could be clarified and what type of
clarification would be required (e.g. as in "targeting"
approach explained above, as in "country of origin"

approach22

The objective of implementinga "country of origin" approach is
to localise the copyright relevant act that must be licenced in
a single Member State (the "country of origin", which could be
for example the Member State in which the content is uploaded
or where the service provider isestablished), regardless of in
how many Member States the work can be accessed or received.
Such an approach has already been introduced atEUlevel with
regard to broadcasting by satellite (see Directive 93/83/EEC on
the coordination of certain rules concerning copyright and
rights related to copyright applicable to satellite
broadcasting and cable retransmission).

)

NO OPINION

9.[In particular if you are a right holder:]Could a
clarification of the territorial scope of the"making available"
right havean effect on the recognition of your rights (e.g.
whether you are considered to be an author or not, whether you
are considered to have transferred your rights or not), on your
remuneration, or on the enforcement of rights (including the
availability of injunctive relief4)?

YES-Please explain how such potential effects could be addressed

NO

NO OPINION

2.Two rights involved in a single act of exploitation

Each act of transmission in digital networks entails (in the
current state of technology and law)several reproductions. This
means that there are two rights that apply to digital
transmissions: the reproduction right and the making available
right. This may complicate the licensing of works for online
use notably when the two rights are held by different
persons/entities.

10.[In particular if you a service provider or a right
holder:]Does the application of two rights to a single act of
economic exploitation in theonline environment (e.g. a
download) create problems for you?

YES-Please explain what type of measures would be needed in
order to address such problems (e.g. facilitation of joint
licences when the rights are in different hands, legislation to
achieve the "bundling of rights")

NO

Ceciestun faux problème. Ilestnécessairequelesdeux
droitsdereproductionet de mise à disposition soient liés pour
l'obtention d'une licence d'autorisation par une radio ou une
chaîne de télévision lorsqu'elle veut diffuser des œuvres
protégées.

Les titulaires de droits confient en principe la gestion de ces
deux droits à la même société de gestion collective:en France,
c'est la Scam, ou la Sacd, ou la Sacem, selon les activités des
titulaires de droits. Ainsi, ceci évite toute dissociation et
les deux droits peuvent être obtenus auprès de la même société
de gestion collective.

Il faut enfin rappeler que la future Directive sur la gestion
collective a pour objet de faciliter la délivrance de licences
d'autorisation pour l'exploitation des œuvres sur internet.

L'introduction de nouvelles mesures ne paraît pas pertinente.

NO OPINION

3.Linking and browsing

Hyperlinks are references to data that lead a user from one
location in the Internet to another. Theyare indispensablefor
the functioning of the Internet as a network. Several cases are
pending before the CJEU23

Cases C-466/12(Svensson),C-348/13(BestwaterInternational) and
C-279/13 (C More entertainment).

in which the question has been raised whether the provision of

a clickable link constitutes an act of communication to the
public/making available to the public subject to the
authorisation of the rightholder.

A user browsing the internet(e.g. viewing a web-page) regularly
creates temporary copies of works and other subject-matter
protected under copyright on the screen and in the 'cache'
memory of his computer. A question has been referred to the
CJEU24

Case C-360/13 (Public Relations Consultants Association Ltd).
See
alsohttp://www.supremecourt.gov.uk/decided-cases/docs/UKSC2011
0202PressSummary.pdf.

as to whether such copies are always covered by the mandatory
exception for temporary acts of reproduction provided for in
Article5(1)of Directive 2001/29/EC.

11.Should theprovision of a hyperlink leadingto a work or other
subject matter protected under copyright, either in general or
under specific circumstances, be subject to the authorisation
of the rightholder?

YES-Please explain whether you consider this to be the case in
general, orunder specificcircumstances,and why

La diversité des hyperliens a pour conséquence que l'on doit
examiner les caractéristiques de chaque lien afin de déterminer
s'il y a acte d'exploitation ou non. Mais de manière générale,
chaque mise à disposition du public avec desliens profonds qui
donnent accès directement à une œuvre protégée nécessite
absolument l'autorisation des titulaires de droits. Il n'est
pas justifié que les sites qui se comportent comme de
véritables exploitants ne rémunèrent pas les créateurs dont
lesdroits sont ainsi utilisés, les contenus servant à ces
opérateurs à générer des recettes dans le cadre de leur
activité ou à valoriser la capitalisation boursière de leur
entreprise.

NO-Please explain whether you consider this to be the case in
general,or under specific circumstances, and why (e.g. because
it does not amount to an act of communication to the public-or
to a new public, or because it should be covered by a copyright
exception)

NO OPINION

12.Should the viewing of a web-pagewhere this implies the
temporary reproduction of a work or other subject matter
protected under copyright on the screen and in the cache memory
of the user's computer, either in general or under specific
circumstances, be subject totheauthorisation oftherightholder?

-Please explain whether you consider this to be the case in
general, or under specific circumstances, and why

NO-Please explain whether you consider this to be the case in
general, or under specific circumstances, and why (e.g.
becauseit is or should be covered by a copyright exception)

NO OPINION

4.Download to own digital content

Digital content is increasingly being bought via digital
transmission (e.g. download to own). Questions arise as to the
possibility forusers to dispose of the files they buy in this
manner (e.g. by selling them or by giving them as a gift). The
principle ofEUexhaustion of the distribution right applies in
the case of the distribution of physical copies (e.g. when a
tangible article suchas a CD or a book, etc. is sold, the right
holder cannot prevent the further distribution of that tangible
article)25

See also recital28of Directive 2001/29/EC.

. The issue that arises here is whether this principle can also
be applied in the case of anact of transmission equivalent in
its effect to distribution (i.e. where the buyer acquires the
property of the copy)26

In Case C-128/11 (Oracle vs. UsedSoft) the CJEU ruled that an
author cannot oppose the resale of a second­hand licence that
allows downloading his computer program from his website and
using it for an unlimited period of time. The exclusive right
of distribution of a copy of a computer program covered by such
a licence is exhausted on its first sale. While it is thus
admitted that the distribution right may be subject to
exhaustion in case of computer programs offered for download
with the right holder's consent, the Court was careful to
emphasise that it reached this decision based on the Computer
Programs Directive. It was stressed thatthis exhaustion rule
constitutedalex specialisin relation to the Information Society
Directive (UsedSoft, par.51,

56).

. This raises difficult questions, notably relating to the
practical application of such an approach (how to avoid
re-sellers keeping and using a copy of a work after they have
"re-sold" it-this is often referred to as the "forward and
delete" question) as well as to the economic implications of
the creation of a second-hand market of copies of perfect
quality that never deteriorate (in contrast to the second-hand
market for physical goods).

13.[In particular if you are an end user/consumer:]Have you
faced restrictions when trying to reselldigital files that you
have purchased (e.g. mp3 file, e-book)?

YES-Please explain by giving examples

NO

NO OPINION

14.[In particular if you are a right holder or a service
provider:] What would be the consequencesof providing a legal
framework enabling the resale of previously purchased digital
content? Please specify per market (type of content) concerned.

[Open question]

Il n'y a aucune différencephysiqueentre un fichier numérique
acheté àl'origine et un fichier "d'occasion", puisqu'il n'y a
aucun signe de dégradation:le consommateur ne fait aucune
différence entre les deux.

D'autre part, il n'y a plus, techniquement, de contrôle possible
sur internet de la diffusion des œuvres pour s'assurer que les
créateurs reçoivent leur juste rémunération.

Le terme de marché d'occasion (l'idée même de marché d'occasion)
n'a aucun sens, dans la mesure où le marché d'origine et le
marché d'occasion sont parfaitement substituables. La
légalisation de la revente d'un contenu numérique entraînerait
inéluctablement, d'un point de vue économique, la
cannibalisation du marché d'origine par le marché d'occasion ,
et donc la remise en cause de la rémunération des titulaires de
droits dont ces derniers bénéficient au sein du marché
d'origine.

Si on mettait en place un tel cadre juridique, cela obligerait
les titulaires de droits à instaurer des mesures techniques de
protection:on sait bien que celles-ci sont très largement
rejetées par les consommateurs, et elles risqueraient de
compromettre l'attractivité des offres légales. Elles seraient
de plus vraisemblablement contournées et ne pourraient pas
remplir à long terme leur fonction.

Il est important de noter que d'un point de vue juridique, si on
mettait en place un cadre qui autorise la revente d'un contenu
numérique acheté sur internet, on dénaturerait profondément les
droits de communication au public et de reproduction, tous deux
mis en œuvre dans tout acte de téléchargement.

Il n'est donc pas envisageablede mettre en place un tel cadre si
on veut préserver l'équilibre entre les titulaires de droits et
les exploitants sur internet.

C.Registration of works and other subject matter-is it a good
idea?

Registration is not often discussedin copyright in theEUas the
existing international treaties in the area prohibit
formalities as a condition for the protection and exercise of
rights. However, this prohibition is not absolute27

For example, it does not affect "domestic" works-i.e. works
originating in the country imposing the formalities as opposed
to works originating in another country.

. Moreover a system of registration does not need to be made
compulsory or constitute a precondition for the protection and
exercise of rights. With a longer term of protection and with
the increased opportunities that digital technology provides
for the use of content (including older works and works that
otherwise would not have been disseminated), the advantages and
disadvantages of a systemof registration are increasingly being
considered28

On the basis of Article3.6of the Directive 2012/28/EU of the
European Parliament and of the Council of25October2012on
certain permitted uses of orphan works, a publicly accessible
online database is currently being set up by the Office for
Harmonisation of the Internal Market (OHIM) for the
registration of orphan works.

.

Would the creation of a registration system atEUlevel help in
the identification and licensing of works and other
subjectmatter?

YES

NO

NO OPINION

What would be the possible advantages of such a system?

[Open question]

17.What would be the possible disadvantages of such a system?

[Open question]

Dans la perspectived'un registre européen,la question du coût de
création et de fonctionnement se posera comme un préalable et
devra être résolue (et financée) par l'Union Européenne.

Un tel système d'enregistrement des œuvres serait ingérable
techniquement et conceptuellement. Il suppose un registre tenu
en temps réel, répertoriant tous les ayants droit, toutes les
œuvres (reconnues comme telles dans tous les pays del'UE),dans
tous les secteurs de la création (unfilmproduit pour le cinéma,
comme une photo, les écrits de toutes sortes et
leursiconographies, les musiques, etc.).

La question se poserait par ailleurs de savoir si, pour faire
fonctionner un tel système, il faudra payer pour faire cet
enregistrement de l'œuvre et si oui, le coût que cet
enregistrement représentera.

L'idée d'un tel registre ne nous parait pas réaliste mais si sa
mise en place était décidée, il serait très difficile de le
faire fonctionner et de rectifier des informations erronées ou
contreditespardes positions antagonistes entre ayants droit
(exemple entre auteurs et cessionnaires).

Un tel registre ferait double emploi avec les répertoires des
sociétés de gestion de droits qui devront pourtant continuer à
les faire fonctionner puisqu'ils sont indispensables pour
répondre au besoin de répartir les droits collectés à leurs
adhérents. L'Europe pourrait en revanche s'intéresser davantage
aux initiatives en cours pour améliorer les bases de données
(par secteur) sur les œuvres et les ayants droit des œuvres.

La question se posera aussi de savoir quelles informations
seraient accessibles dans ce registre?Le (ou les) titulaire(s)
du droit de copie ou d'exploitation (copyright), le (ou les)
auteur(s) de l'œuvre et le (ou les) cessionnaire(s) de droits
d'auteur?

18.Whatincentivesfor registration byrightholderscould be
envisaged?

[Open question]

L'enregistrement ou le réenregistrement d'une œuvre ne pourra ou
ne devra entraîner aucune conséquence sur la nature ou le
périmètre des droits d'auteur reconnus sur l'œuvre. Les
traités internationaux interdisent lesformalités comme
condition pour la protection et l'exercice des droits.

Il ne pourra donc y avoir aucune incitation qui reposerait sur
un niveau de protection ou de droits différenciés selon les
auteurs ou les diffuseurs des œuvres.

D.How to improve the use and interoperability of identifiers

There are many private databases of works and other subject
matter held by producers, collective management organisations,
and institutions such as libraries,which are based to a greater
or lesser extent on the use of (more or less) interoperable,
internationally agreed 'identifiers'. Identifiers can be
compared to a reference number embedded in a work, are specific
to the sector in which they have been developed29

E.g. the International Standard Recording Code (ISRC) is used to
identify recordings, the International Standard Book Number
(ISBN) is used to identify books.

, and identify, variously, the work itself, the owner or the
contributor to a work or othersubject matter. There are notable
examples of where industry is undertaking actions to improve the
interoperability of such identifiers and databases. The Global
Repertoire Database30

You will find more information about this initiative on the
following website:http://www.globalrepertoiredatabase.com/.

should, once operational,provide a single source of information
on the ownership and control of musical works worldwide. The
Linked Content Coalition31

You will find more information about this initiative (funded in
part by the European Commission) on the following
website:www.linkedcontentcoalition.org.

was established to develop building blocks for the expression
and management of rights and licensing across all content and
media types. It includes the development of a Rights Reference
Model (RRM)-a comprehensive data model for all types of rights
in all types of content. The UK Copyright Hub32

You will find more information about this initiative on the
following website:http://www.copyrighthub.co.uk/.

is seeking to take such identification systems a step further,
and to create a linked platform, enabling automated licensing
across different sectors.

19.What should be the role of theEUin promoting the adoption
ofidentifiers in the content sector, and in promoting the
development and interoperability of rights ownership and
permissions databases?

[Open question]

E. Term of protection-is it appropriate?

Works and other subject matter are protected under copyright for
a limited period of time. After the term of protection has
expired, a work falls into the public domain and can be freely
used by anyone (in accordance with the applicable national
rules on moral rights). The Berne Convention33

Berne Convention for the Protection of Literary and Artistic
Works,http://www.wipo.int/treaties/en/ip/berne/.

requires a minimum term of protection of50years after the death
of the author. TheEUrules extend this term of protection
to70years after the death of the author (as do many other
countries, e.g. the US).

With regard to performers in the music sector and phonogram
producers, the term provided for in theEUrules also
extend20years beyond what is mandated in international
agreements, providing for a term of protection of70years after
the first publication. Performers and producers in the
audio-visual sector, however, do not benefit from such an
extended term of protection.

20.Are the current terms of copyright protection still
appropriate in the digital environment?

YES-Please explain

Cette durée de protection est tout à fait adéquate dans
l'environnement numérique.

Si on réduisait la durée de protection du droit d'auteur,ce
serait contraire aux engagements internationaux de l'Union
européenne et de la France.

Ce serait aussi contraire à la politique menée jusqu'ici par la
Commission européenne visant à protéger et à développer
lesindustriesculturelles européennesparune durée de protection
appropriée. Il faut insister sur ce fait:les contenus culturels
(dont la pérénnité est assurée par une durée de protection
appropriée) sont le maillon indispensable pour la compétitivité
des industries culturelles, donc de l'Union européenne. La durée
de protection des œuvres est le moyen de permettre aux auteurs
et aux héritiers de ceux-ci de percevoir la juste rémunération
de leur travail ou de leur patrimoine, à proportion des
recettes ou de l'économie que l'exploitation de leursœuvres
permet.

La durée de protection actuelle est justifiée pour assurer la
pérennité de la culture et du patrimoine culturel. Sans
recettes au titre de la propriété des œuvres, y compris au-delà
de la mort de l'auteur, celles-ci ne seront sans doute
plusgérées aussi activement

NO-Please explain if they should be longer or shorter

NO OPINION

III.Limitations and exceptions in the Single Market

Limitations and exceptions to copyright and related rights
enabletheuse of works and other protected subject-matter,
without obtaining authorisation from the rightholders, for
certain purposes and to a certain extent (for instance the use
for illustration purposes of an extract from a novel by a
teacher in a literature class). AtEUlevel they are established
in a number of copyright directives, most notably Directive
2001/29/EC34

Plus Directive 96/9/EC on the legal protection of databases;
Directive 2009/24/EC on the legal protection of computer
programs, and Directive 92/100/EC on rental right and lending
right.

.

Exceptions and limitations in the national andEUcopyright laws
have to respect international law35

Article9(2)of the Berne Convention for the Protection of
Literary and Artistic Works(1971);Article13of the TRIPS
Agreement (Trade Related Intellectual Property
Rights)1994;Article16(2)of theWIPOPerformers and Phonograms
Treaty(1996);Article9(2)of theWIPOCopyright Treaty(1996).

. In accordance with international obligations, theEUacquis
requiresthat limitations and exceptions can only be applied in
certain special cases which do not conflict with a normal
exploitation of the work or other subject matter and do not
unreasonably prejudice the legitimate interest of the
rightholders.

Whereas the catalogue of limitations and exceptions included
inEUlaw is exhaustive (no other exceptions can be applied to
the rights harmonised at EU level)36

Other than the grandfatheringof the exceptions of minor
importance for analogue uses existing in Member States at the
time of adoption of Directive 2001/29/EC (see, Art. 5(3)(o)).

, these limitations and exceptions are often optional37

With the exception of certain limitations: (i) in the Computer
Programs Directive, (ii) in the Database Directive, (iii)
Article 5(1) in the Directive 2001/29/EC and (iv) the Orphan
Works Directive.

, in the sense that Member States are free to reflect in
national

legislation as many or as few of them as they wish. Moreover,
the formulation of certain of the limitations and exceptions is
general enough to give significant flexibility to the Member
States as to how, and to what extent, to implement them (if
they decide to do so). Finally, it is worth noting that not all
of the limitations and exceptions included in theEUlegal
framework for copyright are of equivalent significance in
policy terms and in terms of their potential effect on the
functioning of the Single Market.

In addition, in the same manner that the definition of the
rights is territorial (i.e. has an effect only within the
territory of the Member State), the definition of the
limitations and exceptions to the rights is territorial too (so
an act that is covered by an exception in a Member State "A" may
still require the authorisation of the rightholder once we move
to the Member State "B")38

Only the exception established in the recent Orphan Works
Directive (a mandatory exception to copyright and related
rights in the case where the rightholders are not known or
cannot be located) has been given across­bordereffect, which
means that, for instance, once a literary work-for instance a
novel-is considered an orphan work in a Member State, that same
novel shall be considered an orphan work in all Member States
and can be used and accessed in all Member States.

.

The cross-border effect of limitations and exceptions also
raises the question of fair compensation of rightholders. In
some instances, Member Statesare obliged to compensate
rightholders for the harm inflicted on them by a limitation or
exception to their rights. In other instances Member States are
not obliged, but may decide, to provide for such compensation.
If a limitation or exception triggeringa mechanism of fair
compensation were to be given cross-border effect (e.g. the
books are used for illustration in an online course given by an
university in a Member State "A" and the students are in a
Member State "B") then there would also be a need toclarify
which national law should determine the level of that
compensation and who should pay it.

Finally, the question of flexibility and adaptability is being
raised: what is the best mechanism to ensure that theEUand
Member States' regulatory frameworks adapt when necessary
(either to clarify that certain uses are covered by an
exception or to confirm that for certain uses the authorisation
of rightholders is required)? The main question here is whether
a greater degree of flexibility can be introducedin theEUand
Member States regulatory framework while ensuring the required
legal certainty, including for the functioning of the Single
Market, and respecting theEU'sinternational obligations.

21.Are there problems arising fromthe fact that most limitations
and exceptions provided intheEU copyright directives are
optional fortheMemberStates?

YES-Please explain by referring to specific cases

NO-Please explain

Sereporterà la réponse dela question27.

NO OPINION

22.Should some/all of the exceptions be made mandatory and, if
so, is there a need for a higher level ofharmonisationof such
exceptions?

YES-Please explain by referring to specific cases

NO-Please explain

Sereporterà la réponse dela question27.

NO OPINION

23.Should any new limitations and exceptions be added to or
removed from the existing catalogue? Please explain by
referring to specific cases.

[Open question]

Sereporterà la réponse dela question27.

24.Independently from the questionsabove, is there a need to
provide for a greater degree of flexibility in theEUregulatory
framework for limitations and exceptions?

YES-Please explain why

NO-Please explain whySereporterà la réponse dela question27.

NO OPINION

25.If yes, what would be the best approach to provide for
flexibility? (e.g. interpretation by national courts and the
ECJ, periodic revisions of the directives, interpretations by
the Commission, built-in flexibility, e.g. in the form of a
fair-use or fair dealing provision/open norm, etc.)? Please
explain indicating what would be the relative advantages and
disadvantages of such an approach as well as its possible
effects on the functioning of the Internal Market.

[Open question]

Sereporterà la réponse dela question27.

26.Does the territoriality of limitations and exceptions, in
your experience, constitute a problem?

YES-Please explain why and specify which exceptions you are
referring to

NO-Please explain why and specify which exceptions you are
referring toSereporterà la réponse dela question27.

NO OPINION

27.In the event that limitationsand exceptions established at
national level were to have cross-border effect, how should the
question of "fair compensation" be addressed, when such
compensation is part of the exception? (e.g. who pays whom,
where?)

[Open question]

L'élargissement desexceptionsaboutirait à terme à un
démantèlement du droit d'auteur, quelle que soit la méthode
utilisée (liste d'exceptions obligatoires, ajout d'exceptions à
la lise déjà prévue dans la Directive sur la société de
l'information, introduction du"fairuse"). C'est une proposition
inacceptable pour les titulaires de droit.

Le droit d'auteur, d'après la Charte des droits fondamentaux de
l'Union européenne, est un droit fondamental relevant du droit
de propriété qui doit être protégé comme tel. Ce droit est
leseul moyen garantissant une rémunération équitable pour les
créateurs:il n'est pas incompatible avec d'autres libertés
fondamentales, telles que la liberté d'expression et la liberté
d'entreprendre.

Le droit d'auteur constitue à vrai dire le seul moyen permettant
aux créateurs de préserver leur liberté fondamentale : celle de
créer.

Toute tentative pour l'affaiblir mettrait en péril la survie des
créateurs et par voie de conséquence, celle des idustries
culturelles.

A. Accesstocontentin librariesand archives

Directive 2001/29/ECenables MemberStatesto reflect in their
national law a range of limitations and exceptions for the
benefit of publicly accessible libraries, educational
establishments and museums, as well as archives. If
implemented, these exceptions allow acts of preservation and
archiving41and enable on-site consultation of the works and
other subject

matter inthe collections of such institutions39

Article 5(3)n of Directive2001/29.

. The public lending (underan exception or limitation) by these
establishments of physical copies of works and other subject
matter is governed by the Rental and Lending Directive40

Article5of Directive 2006/115/EC.

.

Questions arise as to whether the current framework continuesto
achieve the objectives envisaged or whether it needs to be
clarified or updated to cover use in digital networks. At the
same time, questions arise as to the effect of such a possible
expansion on the normal exploitation of works and other subject
matter and as to the prejudice this may cause to rightholders.
The role of licensing and possible framework agreements between
different stakeholders also needs to be considered here.

1.Preservation and archiving

The preservation of the copies of works or other subject-matter
held in the collections of cultural establishments (e.g. books,
records, or films)-the restoration or replacement of works, the
copying of fragile works-may involve the creation of another
copy/ies of these works orother subject matter. Most Member
States provide for an exception in their national laws allowing
for the making of such preservation copies. The scope of the
exception differs from Member State to Member State (as regards
the type of beneficiary establishments, the types of
works/subject-matter covered by the exception, the mode of
copying and the number of reproductions that a beneficiary
establishment may make). Also, the current legal status of new
types of preservation activities (e.g. harvesting andarchiving
publicly available web content) is often uncertain.

28.(a)[In particular if you are an institutional user:]Have you
experienced specific problems when trying touse an exception to
preserve and archive specific works or other subject matter in
your collection?

(b)[In particular if you are a right holder:]Have you
experienced problems with the use by libraries, educational
establishments, museum or archives ofthepreservation exception?

YES-Please explain, by Member State, sector, and the type of use
in question.

NO

NO OPINION

29.If there are problems, how would they best be solved?[Open
question]

30.If your view is that a legislativesolution is needed, what
would be its main elements? Which activities of the beneficiary
institutions should be covered and under which conditions?

31.If your view is that a different solution is needed, what
would it be?[Open question]

2.Off-premises access to library collections

Directive 2001/29/EC provides an exception for the consultation
of works and other subject- matter (consulting an e-book,
watching a documentary) via dedicated terminals on the premises
of such establishments for the purpose of research and private
study. The online consultation of works and other
subject-matter remotely (i.e. when the library user is not on
the premises of the library) requires authorisation and is
generally addressed in agreements between
universities/libraries and publishers. Some argue that the law
rather than agreements should provide for the possibility to,
and the conditions for, granting online access to collections.

32.(a)[In particular if you are an institutional user:]Have you
experienced specific problems when trying to negotiate
agreements with rights holders that enable you to provide
remote access, including acrossborders, to your collections (or
parts thereof) for purposes of research and private study?

[In particular if you are an end user/consumer:]Have you
experienced specific problems when trying to consult, including
across borders, works and other subject-matter held
inthecollections of institutions such as universities and
national libraries when you are not on the premises of the
institutions in question?

[In particular if you are a right holder:]Have you negotiated
agreementswith institutional users that enable those
institutions to provide remote access, including across
borders, to the works or other subject-matter in their
collections, for purposes of research and private study?

[Open question]

33.If there are problems, how would they best be solved?[Open
question]

34.If your view is that a legislative solution is needed, what
would be its main elements? Which activities of the beneficiary
institutions should be covered and under which conditions?

35.If your view is that a different solution is needed, what
would it be?

[Open question]

3.E-lending

Traditionally, public libraries have loaned physical copies of
works (i.e. books, sometimes also CDs and DVDs) to their users.
Recent technological developments have made it technically
possible for libraries to provide users with temporary access
to digital content, such as e-books, music or films via
networks. Under the current legal framework, libraries need to
obtain the authorisation of the rights holders to organise such
e-lending activities. In various Member States, publishers and
libraries are currently experimenting with different business
models for the making available of works online, including
direct supply of e-books to libraries by publishersor bundling
by aggregators.

36.(a)[In particular if you are a library:]Have you experienced
specific problems when trying to negotiate agreements to enable
the electronic lending (e-lending), including across borders,
ofbooks or other materials held in your collection?

[In particular if you are an end user/consumer:]Have you
experienced specific problems when trying to borrow books or
other materials electronically (e-lending), including across
borders, from institutions such as public libraries?

[In particular if you are a right holder:]Have you negotiated
agreements with libraries to enable them to lend books or other
materials electronically, including across borders?

YES-Please explain with specificexamples

NO

NO OPINION

37.If there are problems, how would they best be solved?[Open
question]

The following two questions are relevant both to this point
(n°3)and the previous one (n°2).

38.[In particular if you are an institutional user:]What
differences do you see in the management of physical and online
collections, including providing access to your subscribers?
What problems have you encountered?

39.[In particular if you are a right holder:]What difference do
you see betweenlibraries' traditional activities such as
on-premises consultation or public lending and activities such
as off-premises(online,at adistance)consultation and e-lending?
What problems have you encountered?

[Open question]

4.Mass digitisation

The term"mass digitisation" is normally used to refer to efforts
by institutions such as libraries and archives to digitise (e.g.
scan) the entire content or part of their collections with an
objective to preserve these collections and, normally, to make
them available to the public. Examples are efforts by libraries
to digitise novels form the early part of the 20thcentury or
whole collections of pictures of historical value. This matter
has been partly addressed at theEUlevel by the2011Memorandum of
Understanding (MoU) on key principles on the digitisation and
making available of out of commerce works (i.e. works which are
no longer found in the normal channels of commerce), which is
aiming to facilitate mass digitisation efforts (for books and
learned journals) on the basis of licence agreements between
libraries and similar cultural institutions on the one hand and
the collecting societies representing authors and publishers on
the other41

ou will find more information about his MoU on the following
website:http://ec.europa.eu/internalmarket/copyright/out-of-commerce/index
en.htm.

. Provided the required funding is ensured (digitisation
projects are extremely expensive), the result of this MoU
should be that books that are currently to be found only in the
archives of, for instance, libraries will be digitised and made
available online to everyone. The MoU is based on voluntary
licences (granted by Collective Management Organisations on the
basis of the mandates they receive from authors and publishers).
Some Member States may need to enact legislation to ensure the
largest possible effect of such licences (e.g. by establishing
in legislation a presumption of representation of a collecting
society or the recognition of an "extended effect" to the
licences granted)42

France and Germany have already adopted legislation to back the
effects of the MoU. The French
act(LOIn°2012-287du1ermars2012relativeà l'exploitation
numérique des livres indisponibles du xxe siècle)foresees
collective management, unless the author or publisher in
question opposes such management. The German act(Gesetz zur
Nutzung verwaister und vergriffener Werke und einer weiteren
Änderung des Urheberrechtsgesetzes
vom1.Oktober2013)containsalegalpresumption of representation by
a collecting society in relation to works whose rightholders are
not members of the collecting society.

.

40.[Inparticular if you are an institutional user, engaging or
wanting to engage in massdigitisation projects, a right holder,
a collective management organisation:]Would it be necessary in
your country to enact legislation to ensure that the results of
the2011MoU(i.e.the agreements concluded between libraries and
collecting societies) have across­bordereffect so that out of
commerce works can be accessed acrosstheEU?

YES-Please explain why and how it could best be achieved

NO-Please explain

NO OPINION

41.Would it be necessary to develop mechanisms, beyond those
already agreed for other types of content (e.g. for audio- or
audio-visual collections, broadcasters' archives)?

YES-Please explain

NO - Please explain

NO OPINION

B. Teaching

Directive 2001/29/EC46enables Member States to implement in
their national legislation limitations and exceptions for the
purpose of illustration for non-commercial teaching.
Suchexceptions would typically allow a teacher to use parts of
or full works to illustrate his course, e.g. by distributing
copies of fragments of a book or of newspaper articles in the
classroom or by showing protected content on a smart board
without havingto obtain authorisation from the right holders.
The open formulation of this (optional) provision allows for
rather different implementation at Member States level. The
implementation of the exception differs from Member State to
Member State, with several Member States providing instead a
framework for the licensing of content for certain educational
uses. Some argue that the law should provide for better
possibilities for distance learning and study at home.

42.(a)[In particular if you are an end user/consumer or an
institutional user:]Have you experienced specific problems when
trying to use works or other subject-matter for illustration for
teaching, including across borders?

(b)[In particular if you are a right holder:]Have you
experienced specific problems resulting from the way in which
works or other subject-matter are used for illustration for
teaching, including across borders?

YES-Please explain

NO

NO OPINION

43.If there are problems, how would they best be solved?[Open
question]

44. What mechanisms exist inthemarket place to facilitatetheuse
of content for illustration for teaching purposes? How
successful are they?

[Open question]

45. If your view is that a legislative solution is needed, what
would be its main elements? Which activities of the beneficiary
institutions should be covered and under what conditions?

[Open question]

46.If your view is that a different solution is needed, what
would it be?

[Open question]

C. Research

Directive 2001/29/EC43

(a)[In particular if you are an end user/consumer or an
institutional user:]Have you experienced specific problems when
trying to use works or other subject matter in the context of
research projects/activities, including across borders?

(b)[In particularif you are a right holder:]Have you experienced
specific problems resulting from the way in which works or other
subject-matter are used in the context of research
projects/activities, including across borders?

YES-Please explain

enables Member Statesto choose whether to implement in their
national laws a limitation for the purpose of non-commercial
scientific research. The open formulation of this (optional)
provision allows for rather different implementations at Member
States level.

NO

NO OPINION

48.If there are problems, how would they best be solved?[Open
question]

49.What mechanisms exist in the Member States to facilitate the
use of content for research purposes? How successful are they?

[Open question]

D. Disabilities

Directive 2001/29/EC44

Article5(3)b of Directive2001/29.

provides for an exception/limitationfor the benefit of people
with a disability. The open formulation of this (optional)
provision allows for rather different implementations at Member
States level. AtEUand international level projects have been
launched to increase the accessibility of works and other
subject-matter for persons with disabilities (notably by
increasing the number of works published in special formats and
facilitating their distribution across the European Union)45

The European Trusted Intermediaries Network (ETIN) resulting
from a Memorandum of Understanding between representatives of
the right-holder community (publishers, authors, collecting
societies) and interested parties  such  as  associations  for
blind  and  dyslexic  persons
(http://ec.europa.eu/internalmarket/copyright/initiatives/access/index
en.htm) and the Trusted IntermediaryGlobal Accessible
Resources(TIGAR)project inWIPO (http://www.visionip.
org/portal/en/).

.

The Marrakesh Treaty46

Marrakesh Treaty to Facilitate Access to Published Works by
Visually Impaired Persons and Persons with Print Disabilities,
Marrakesh, June17to28 2013.

has been adopted to facilitateaccess to published works for
persons who are blind, visually impaired, or otherwise print
disabled. The Treaty creates a mandatory exception to copyright
that allows organisations for the blind to produce, distribute
and make available accessible formatcopies to visually impaired
persons without the authorisation of the rightholders. TheEUand
its Member States have started work to sign and ratify the
Treaty. This may require the adoption of certain provisions
atEUlevel (e.g. to ensure the possibilityto exchange accessible
format copies across borders).

50.(a)[In particular if you are a person with a disability or an
organisation representingpersons with disabilities:]Have you
experienced problems with accessibility to content, including
across borders, arising from Member States' implementation of
this exception?

[In particular if you are an organisation providing services for
persons with disabilities:]Have you experienced problems when
distributing/communicating works published in specialformats
across theEU?

[In particular if you are a right holder:]Have you experienced
specific problems resulting fromtheapplication of limitations
or exceptions allowing forthedistribution/communication of
works published in special formats, including across borders?

YES-Please explain by giving examples

NO

NO OPINION

51.If there are problems, what could be done to improve
accessibility?[Open question]

52.What mechanisms exist in themarket place to facilitate
accessibility to content? How successful are they?

[Open question]

E. Text and data mining

Text and data mining/content mining/data analytics47

For the purpose of the presentdocument, the term "text and data
mining" will be used.

are different terms used to describe increasingly important
techniques used in particular by researchers for the
exploration of vast amounts of existing texts and data (e.g.,
journals, web sites, databases etc.). Through the use of
software or other automated processes, an analysis is made of
relevant texts and data in order to obtain new insights,
patterns and trends.

The texts and data used for mining are either freely accessible
on the internet oraccessible through subscriptions to e.g.
journals and periodicals that give access to the databases of
publishers. A copy is made of the relevant texts and data (e.g.
on browser cache memories or in computers RAM memories or onto
the hard disk of a computer), prior to the actual analysis.
Normally, it is considered that to mine protected works or
other subject matter, it is necessary to obtain authorisation
from the right holders for the making of such copies unless
such authorisation can be implied (e.g.content accessible to
general public without restrictions on the internet, open
access).

Some argue that the copies required for text and data mining are
covered by the exception for temporary copies in Article5.1of
Directive 2001/29/EC. Others considerthat text and data mining
activities should not even be seen as covered by copyright.
None of this is clear, in particular since text and data mining
does not consist only of a single method, but can be undertaken
in several different ways. Important questions also remain as
to whether the main problems arising in relation to this issue
go beyond copyright (i.e. beyond the necessity or not to obtain
the authorisation to use content) and relate rather to the need
to obtain "access" to content (i.e. being able to use e.g.
commercial databases).

A specific Working Group was set up on this issue in the
framework of the "Licences for Europe" stakeholder dialogue. No
consensus was reached among participating stakeholders on either
the problems to be addressed orthe results. At the same time,
practical solutions to facilitate text and data mining of
subscription-based scientific content were presented by
publishers as an outcome of "Licences for Europe"48

See the document "Licences for Europe-ten pledges to bring more
content
online":http://ec.europa.eu/internalmarket/copyright/docs/licences-for-europe/131113
ten-pledges en.pdf.

. In the context of these discussions, other stakeholders argued
thatno additional licences should be required to mine material
to which access has been provided through a subscription
agreement and considered that a specific exception for text and
data mining should be introduced, possibly on the basis of a
distinction between commercial and non-commercial.

53.(a)[In particular if you are an end user/consumer or an
institutional user:]Have you experienced obstacles, linked to
copyright, when trying to use text or data mining methods,
including across borders?

[In particular if you are a service provider:]Have you
experienced obstacles, linked to copyright, when providing
services based on text or data mining methods, including across
borders?

[In particular if you are a right holder:]Have you
experiencedspecific problems resulting fromtheuse of text and
data mining in relation to copyright protected content,
including across borders?

YES-Please explain

NO - Please explain

NO OPINION

54.If there are problems, how would they best be solved?[Open
question]

55.If your view is that a legislative solution is needed, what
would be its mainelements?Which activities should be covered
and under what conditions?

[Open question]

56.If your view is that a differentsolution is needed, what
would it be?

[Open question]

57.Are there other issues, unrelated to copyright, that
constitute barriers to the use of text or data mining methods?

[Open question]

F. User-generated content

Technological and service developments mean that citizens can
copy, use and distribute content at little to no financial
cost. As a consequence, new types of online activities are
developing rapidly, including the making of so-called
"user-generated content". While users can create totally
original content, they can also take one or several
pre-existing works, change something in the work(s), and upload
the result on the Internet e.g. to platforms andblogs49

A typical example could bethe "kitchen" or "wedding" video
(adding one's own video to a pre-existing sound recording), or
adding one's own text to a pre-existing photograph. Other
examples are "mash-ups" (blending two sound recordings), and
reproducing parts of journalistic work (report, review etc.)
ina blog.

.User-generated content (UGC) can thus cover the modification of
pre-existing works even if the newly-generated/"uploaded" work
does not necessarily require a creative effort and results from
merely adding, subtracting or associating some pre-existing
content with other pre-existing content. This kind of activity
is not "new" as such. However, the development of social
networking and social media sites that enable users to share
content widely has vastly changed the scale ofsuch activities
and increased the potential economic impact for those holding
rights in the pre-existing works. Re-use is no longer the
preserve of a technically and artistically adept elite. With
the possibilities offered by the new technologies, re-useis
open to all, at no cost. This in turn raises questions with
regard to fundamental rights such the freedom of expression and
the right to property.

A specific Working Group was set up on this issue in the
framework of the "Licences for Europe" stakeholder dialogue. No
consensus was reached among participating stakeholders on either
the problems to be addressed or the results or even the
definition of UGC. Nevertheless, a wide range of views were
presented as to the best way to respond to this phenomenon.One
view was to say that a new exception is needed to cover UGC, in
particular non-commercial activities by individuals such as
combining existing musical works with videos, sequences of
photos, etc. Another view was that no legislative change is
needed: UGC is flourishing, and licensing schemes are
increasingly available (licence schemes concluded

between rightholders and platforms as well as micro-licences
concluded between rightholders and the users generating the
content. In any event, practical solutions to ease
user-generatedcontentand facilitate micro-licensing for small
users were pledged by rightholders across different sectors as
a result of the "Licences for Europe" discussions50

See the document "Licences for Europe-ten pledges to bring
morecontent
online":http://ec.europa.eu/internalmarket/copyright/docs/licences-for-europe/131113
ten-pledges en.pdf.

.

58.(a)[In particular if you are an end user/consumer:]Have you
experienced problemswhen trying to use pre-existing works or
other subject matter to disseminate new content on the
Internet, including across borders?

[In particular if you are a service provider:]Have you
experienced problems when users publish/disseminate new content
based on the pre-existing works or other subject-matter through
your service, including across borders?

[In particular if you are a right holder:]Have you experienced
problemsresulting from the way the users are using pre-existing
works or other subject-matter to disseminate new content on the
Internet, including across borders?

YES-Please explain by giving examples

Une nouvelleexceptiondans ce domaine aurait inévitablement pour
effet de créer de nombreux abus.

Il faudrait préalablement faire une typologie des œuvres
concernées (types d'emprunts, nombres d'emprunts, utilisation
des emprunts dans la nouvelle œuvre), ce qui est matériellement
impossible.

Par ailleurs les critères parfois mis en avant de la«non
exploitation»ou du caractère«non marchand»devraient être
clarifiés dans le contexte du numérique (financement par la
publicité, la monétisation, les affiliations).

Enfin le risque d'atteintes au droit moral des auteurs est
évident. Il ne doit y avoir aucune exception au droit moral
reconnu aux auteurs du fait de contenus générésparles
utilisateurs mais utilisant des œuvres préexistantes.

La gestion collective peut probablement, dans certains secteurs
et dans unecertaine mesure, permettre de trouver des conditions
acceptables pour la diffusion d'œuvres intégrant des contenus
protégés dans des conditions simplifiées et automatisées.

NO

NO OPINION

59.(a)[In particular if you areanend user/consumer oraright
holder:]Have you experienced problems when trying to ensure
that the work you have created (on the basis of pre-existing
works) is properly identified for online use? Are proprietary
systems sufficient in this context?

(b)[In particular if you area service provider:]Do you provide
possibilities for users that are publishing/disseminating the
works they have created (on the basis of pre-existing works)
through your service to properly identify these works for
online use?

YES-Please explain

NO-Please explain

NO OPINION

60.(a)[In particular if you are an end user/consumer or a right
holder):]Have you experienced problems when trying to be
remunerated for the use of the work you have created (on the
basis of pre-existing works)?

(b)[In particular if you are a service provider:]Do you provide
remuneration schemes for users publishing/disseminating the
works they have created (on the basis of pre-existing works)
through yourservice?

YES-Please explain

NO - Please explain

NO OPINION

61.If there are problems, how would they best be solved?[Open
question]

Sereporterà la réponse dela question63.

62.If your view is that a legislative solution is needed, what
would be its main elements? Which activities should be covered
and under whatconditions?

[Open question]

Sereporterà la réponse dela question63.

63.If your view is that a different solution is needed, what
would it be?

[Open question]

Avant de légiférer, il convient de réfléchir de façon
approfondie àla question des contenus générés par les
utilisateurs (UGC,User-generatedcontent) car c'est une question
complexe. Cette question recouvre des réalités très diverses:un
contenu (par exemple un vidéoclip) posté sur un site sans
aucune modification,ou une vidéo amateur sonorisée par une
œuvre musicale ou sonore, ou une adaptation d'œuvres
préexistantes, etc.

Dès lors (et comme le souligne le rapport DeWolfcommandité par
la Commission européenne) il peut être dangereux, et en tout
cas prématuré, d'instaurer une exception pour les UGC sans
informations préalables:il faut d'abord disposer d'un étude
démontrant l'ampleur de ce phénomène;il faut ensuite mesurer
les conséquence juridiques qu'une telle modification pourrait
entraîner sur les droits des créateurs, qu'il s'agisse du droit
moral comme du droit patrimonial.

Et même si ceux qui prônent cette exception évoquent un
caractère non commercial de cette activité qui pourrait
justifier une telle entorse au droit d'auteur, ce critère ne
peut être accepté en droit d'auteur:le préjudice subi par les
créateurs au titre de leurs droits patrimoniaux et de leur
droit moral est indépendant du caractère commercial de
l'utilisaton de leurs œuvres. Une adaptation d'une œuvre peut
mettre en péril l'intégritéde cette dernière même si elle n'a
pas de but commercial.

Et d'ailleurs, si un internaute poste une œuvre sans intention
commerciale, la plateforme qui en permet la diffusion, elle, en
tire forcément un bénéfice. La notion de "non commercial" n'est
donc pas acceptable et pas du tout pertinente pour justifier la
création d'une exception.

IV.Private copying and reprography

Directive 2001/29/EC enables Member States to implement in their
national legislation exceptions or limitations to the
reproduction right for copies made for private use and
photocopying51

Article5.2)(a) and (b) of Directive2001/29.

. Levies are charges imposed at national level ongoods typically
used for such purposes (blank media, recording equipment,
photocopying machines, mobile listening devices such as mp3/mp4
players, computers, etc.) with a view to compensating
rightholders for the harm they suffer when copies are made
without their authorisation by certain categories of persons
(i.e. natural persons making copies for their private use) or
through use of certain technique (i.e. reprography). In that
context, levies are important for rightholders.

With the constant developments in digital technology, the
question arises as to whether the copying of files by
consumers/end-users who have purchased content online-e.g. when
a person has bought an MP3 file and goes on to store multiple
copies of that file (in her computer, her tablet and her mobile
phone)-also triggers, or should trigger, the application of
private copying levies. It is argued that, in some cases, these
levies may indeed be claimed by rightholders whether or not the
licence fee paid by the service provider already covers copies
made by the end user. This approach could potentially lead to
instances of double payments whereby levies could be claimed on
top of service providers' licence fees5657.

There is also an on-going discussion as to the application or
not of levies to certain types of cloud-basedservicessuch as
personal lockers or personal video recorders.

64.In your view, is there a need to clarify at theEUlevel the
scope and application of the private copying and reprography
exceptions52

Art. 5.2(a) and 5.2(b) of Directive 2001/29/EC.

in the digital environment?

YES-Please explain

NO-Please explainSereporterà la réponse dela question71

NO OPINION

65.Should digital copies made byend users for private purposes
in the context of a service that has been licensed by
rightholders, and where the harm totherightholder is minimal,
be subject to private copying levies?53

This issue was also addressed in the recommendations of Mr
AntonioVitorinoresulting from the mediation on private copying
and reprography levies

YES-Please explain

NO-Please explainSereporterà la réponse dela question71

NO OPINION

66.How would changes in levies withrespect to the application to
online services (e.g. services based on cloud computing
allowing, for instance, users to have copies on different
devices) impact the development and functioning of new business
models on the one hand and rightholders' revenue on the other?

[Open question]

Sereporterà la réponse dela question71

67.Would you see an added value in making levies visible on the
invoices for products subject to levies?54

This issue was also addressed in the recommendations of Mr
AntonioVitorinoresulting from the mediation on private copying
and reprography levies.

YES-Please explain

NO - Please explain

NO OPINION

Diverging national systems levy different products and apply
different tariffs. This results in obstacles to the free
circulation of goods and services in the Single Market. At the
same time, many Member States continue to allow the
indiscriminate application of private copying levies to all
transactions irrespective of the person to whom the product
subject to a levy is sold(e.g.private person or business). In
that context, not all Member States have ex ante exemption
and/or ex post reimbursement schemes which could remedy these
situations and reduce the number of undue payments55

This issue was also addressed in the recommendations of Mr
Antonio Vitorino resulting from the mediation on private
copying and reprography levies.

.

68.Have you experienced a situation where a cross-border
transaction resulted in undue levy payments, or duplicate
payments of the same levy, or other obstacles to the free
movement of goods orservices?

YES-Please specify the type of transaction and indicate the
percentage of the undue payments. Please also indicate how a
priori exemption and/or ex postreimbursement schemes could help
to remedy the situation.

NO-Please explainSereporterà la réponse dela question71

NO OPINION

69.What percentage of products subjectto a levy is sold to
persons other than natural persons for purposes clearly
unrelated to private copying? Do any of those transactions
result in undue payments? Please explain in detail the example
you provide (type of products, type of transaction,
stakeholders, etc.).

[Open question]

Sereporterà la réponse dela question71

70.Where such undue payments arise, what percentage of trade do
they affect? To what extent could a priori exemptions and/or ex
post reimbursement schemes existing in some MemberStates help to
remedy the situation?

[Open question]

Sereporterà la réponse dela question71

71.If you have identified specific problems with the current
functioning of the levy system, how would these problems best
be solved?

[Open question]

Ilesttrès étonnant delirecesquestionsconcernant l'exception pour
copie privée.

La Cour de justice de l'Union européenne y a déjà répondu de
façon appropriée, en légitimant à plusieurs reprises le
dispositif de l'exception pour copie privée.

Ces questions ne doivent donc pas servir de prétexte pour
fragiliser un dispositif qui a démontré sa pertinence et sa
souplesse, notammentvisàvisdes nouveaux services numériques.

Cette pertinence tient au fait que le dispositif de l'exception
et de la rémunération pourcopie privée s'applique dès lors
qu'un particulier réalise une copie pour son propre usage, quel
que soit le service concerné et la technologie utilisée.

Par ailleurs, un régime d'exception pour copie privée, qui
permet aux usagers de réaliser des copies pour leur propre
usage, doit nécessairement s'accompagner d'un système de
compensation équitable auprofitdu titulaire de droit.

Comme l'a souligné à plusieurs reprises la Cour de Justice de
l'Union européenne, il faut préserver le point d'équilibre
entreles intérêts des créateurs et les intérêts des usagers.

V.Fair remuneration of authors and performers

TheEUcopyright acquis recognisesfor authors and performers a
number of exclusive rights and, in the case of performers whose
performances are fixed in phonograms, remuneration rights. There
are few provisions in theEUcopyright law governing thetransferof
rights from authors or performers to producers56

See e.g. Directive 92/100/EEC, Art.2(4)-(7).

or determining who the owner of the rights is when the work or
other subject matter is created in the context of an employment
contract57

See e.g. Art.2.3.of Directive 2009/24/EC, Art.4of Directive
96/9/EC.

. This is an area that has been traditionally left for Member
States to regulate and there are significant

differences in regulatory approaches. Substantial differences
also exist between different sectors of the creative
industries.

Concerns continue to be raised that authors and performers are
not adequately remunerated, in particular but not solely, as
regards online exploitation. Many consider that the economic
benefit of new forms of exploitation is not being fairly shared
along the whole value chain. Another commonly raised issue
concerns contractual practices, negotiation mechanisms,
presumptions of transfer of rights, buy-out clauses and the
lack of possibility to terminate contracts. Some stakeholders
are of the opinion that rules at national level do not suffice
to improve their situation and that action atEUlevel is
necessary.

72.[In particular if you are an author/performer:] What is the
best mechanism (or combination of mechanisms) to ensure that
you receive an adequate remuneration fortheexploitation of your
works and performances?

[Open question]

C'est la gestioncollective quisemble être le dispositif le plus
approprié:étant donné que notre époque est à l'utilisation
massive d'œuvres protégées sur internet, elle permet aux
usagers d'accéder aux catalogues nécessaires au lancement de
leurs plateformes, aux créateurs d'être rémunérés et au public
d'avoir accès à un vaste choix d'œuvres protégées par le biais
de services légaux.

73.Is thereaneed to act at theEUlevel (for instance to prohibit
certain clauses in contracts)?

YES-Please explain

Il ne s'agit pas d'envisager une harmonisation européenne par le
plus petit dénominateur commun des règles juridiques en vigueur
dans l'U.E. en matière de droit d'auteur.

L'Union Européenne pourrait utilement, en revanche, fixer
certaines lignes directrices dans le cas où l'auteur se verrait
proposer des contrats exclusifs de cession, parfois coercitifs
et pour la durée de la protection, soit 70 ans post-mortem.

Dans la plupart des situations, les auteurs sont dans
l'incapacité de véritablement négocier leurs contrats de
cession dont les termes sont totalement imposés par
les«grands»éditeurs, les producteurs ou les télédiffuseurs
des œuvres. Dans cescas, il s'agit pour nombre d'auteurs
d'accepter ou de refuser de simples contrats d'adhésion, non
négociables sur des clauses aussi essentielles que la durée de
cession (souvent confondue dans les contrats avec la durée de
protection), sur l'étendue de lacession (généralement le monde,
mais dans le secteur musical l'«univers»),sur les droits
d'exploitation cédés (tous sans aucune obligation
d'exploitation effective des droits ainsi cédés).

En l'état actuel du droit et des pratiques, il n'y a aucune
certitude que les comptes envoyés aux auteurs soient
équitables, transparents et réels. En l'état actuel, il n'y a
pas de possibilité, simple et raisonnable, de sortir d'un
contrat d'édition au-delà d'une certaine durée, alors même
qu'il est possible que plusaucune exploitation ne soit faite de
l'œuvre en cause ou que l'auteur ne touche plus rien depuis
plusieurs années.

NO - Please explain why

NO OPINION

74.If you consider that the currentrules are not effective, what
would you suggest to address the shortcomings you identify?

[Open question]

VI.Respect for rights

Directive 2004/48/EE58

Directive 2004/48/EC ofthe European Parliament and of the
Council of 29 April 2004 on the enforcement of intellectual
property rights.

provides for a harmonised framework for the civil enforcement of
intellectual property rights, including copyright and related
rights. The Commission has consulted broadly on this text59

You will find more information on the following
website:http://ec.europa. eu/internal
market/iprenforcement/directive/index en.htm

. Concerns have been raised as to whether someof its provisions
are still fit to ensure a proper respect for copyright in the
digital age. On the one hand, the current measures seem to be
insufficient to deal with the new challenges brought by the
dissemination of digital content on the internet; ontheother
hand, there are concerns about the current balance between
enforcement of copyright and the protection of fundamental
rights, in particular the right for a private life and data
protection. While it cannot be contested that enforcement
measures should always be available in case of infringement of
copyright, measures could be proposed to strengthen respect for
copyright when the infringed content is used for a commercial
purpose60

For example when the infringing content is offered on a website
which gets advertising revenues that depend on the volume of
traffic.

. One means to do this could be to clarify the role of
intermediaries in the IP infrastructure61

This clarification should not affect the liability regime of
intermediary service providersestablished by Directive
2000/31/EC on electronic commerce, which will remain unchanged.

. At the same time, there could be clarification of the
safeguards for respect of private life and data protection for
private users.

75.Should the civil enforcementsystem in theEUbe rendered more
efficient for infringements of copyright committed with a
commercial purpose?

YES-Please explain

NO-Please explain

NO OPINION

76.In particular, is the currentlegal framework clear enough to
allow for sufficient involvement of intermediaries (such as
Internet service providers, advertising brokers, payment
service providers, domain name registrars, etc.) in inhibiting
online copyright infringements with a commercial purpose? If
not, what measures would be useful to foster the cooperation of
intermediaries?

[Open question]

77.Does the current civil enforcement framework ensure that the
right balance is achieved between the right to have one's
copyright respectedand other rights such as the protection
ofprivate life and protection of personal data?

YES-Please explain

NO-Please explain

NO OPINION

VII.A singleEUCopyright Title

The idea of establishing a unifiedEUCopyright Title has been
present in the copyright debate for quite some time now,
although views as to the merits and the feasibility of such an
objective are divided. A unifiedEUCopyright Title would totally
harmonise the area of copyright law in theEUand replace national
laws. There would then be a singleEUtitle instead of a bundle of
national rights. Some see this as the only manner in which a
truly Single Market for content protected by copyright can be
ensured, while others believe that the sameobjective can better
be achieved by establishing a higher level ofharmonisationwhile
allowing for a certain degree of flexibility and specificity in
Member States' legal systems.

78.Should theEUpursue the establishment of a singleEUCopyright
Title,as a means of establishing a consistent framework for
rights and exceptions to copyright across theEU,as well as a
single framework for enforcement?

YES

NO.En l'état actuel, une harmonisation éventuelle se ferait par
un nivellement par le bas. Or, le travail des auteurs et les
droits sur l'exploitation des œuvres sont à la base d'une
source économique importante en Europe (certains documents font
état de8millions d'emplois dans les industries culturelles
européennes et indiquent que le chiffre d'affaires de ces
secteurs représenterait presque5 %du PIB cumulé des états
membres).

NO OPINION

79.Should this be the next step in the development of copyright
in theEU?Does the current level of differenceamong the Member
State legislation mean that this is a longer term project?

[Open question]

VIII.Other issues

The above questionnaire aims to provide a comprehensive
consultation on the most important matters relating to the
currentEUlegal framework for copyright. Should any important
matters have been omitted, we would appreciate if you could
bring them to our attention, so they can be properly addressed
in the future.

80.Are there any other important matters related to theEUlegal
framework for copyright? Please explain and indicate how such
matters should be addressed.

[Open question]

La Directivesur la Société de l'informationestune norme
juridique suffisamment solide et cohérente pour accompagner les
évolutions technologiques liées à l'exploitation des œuvres
artistiques sur internet. Elle offre un cadre juridique
approprié permettant de résoudre de nombreuses questions liées
à la numérisation et à la diffusion en ligne des œuvres de
l'esprit, ceci est démontré depuis plus dedix ans.

Il n'est pas souhaitable de modifier cette directive car cela
comporte un risque avéré de remise en cause des fondements du
droit d'auteur au détriment des seuls créateurs.

La consultation lancée par la Commission européenne est sans
doute légitime dans son principe, mais elle est discutable dans
sa forme et ses modalités.

Elle appelle aussi des remarques sur ses modalités
d'organisation.

Le délai octroyé pour mener la consultation (même s'il a été
repoussé) est beaucoup trop court compte tenude la nature, de
la technicité et du nombre de questions.

Il est totalement anormal, sur le plan des règles européennes
mais aussi sur le plan des principes, que la consultation n'ait
été publiéepar la commission que dans une version anglaise,
obligeant les citoyens et les organisations professionnelles
des différents états membres à une uniformité culturelle et
terminologique particulièrement dommageable dans cette matière
où l'Europe ne sembleplus parler que de copyright et jamais
deauthors right law.

Une telle consultation ne pouvait être utilement entreprise
qu'avec une réelle étude d'impacts économique et juridique dans
les différents pays de l'Union concernant les divers secteurs
des industries culturelles.

Les résultats d'une telle étude préalable auraient pu permettre
de mesurer l'importance réelle de l'activité des créateurs
(auteurs et/ou compositeurs des différents secteurs de la
création) sur l'économie et l'emploi, direct ou indirect, dans
l'Union Européenne et dans les différents états membres.

Mais si la Commission devait envisager une telle modification,
il faut qu'elle traite de la véritabe problématique qui
concerne les créateurs:le transfert de valeur qui s'opère au
profit decertains intermédiaires techniques de l'internet
(Google, Facebook, Apple, Amazon,etc)au détriment des auteurs,
et, dans un cercle plus large, des acteurs des industries
culturelles.

Si internet est si attractif, c'est en grande partie par les
contenusculturels qu'il met à la disposition du public. Il est
légitime que ceux qui bénéficient de l'exploitation des œuvres
protégées partagent leurs profits avec ceux qui en sont à
l'origine, c'est à dire les créateurs.

Un juste partage du bénéfice réalisé doitdonc s'organiser entres
les géants de l'internet qui bien souvent se réfugient derrière
le statut d'intermédiaires techniques (hébergeurs) et les
créateurs. Or cette problématique de partage de la valeur
entre intermédiaires techniques et titulaires de droit n'est
absolument pas abordée par le présent questionnaire.

2  As announced in the Intellectual Property Strategy'A single
market for Intellectual Property Rights: COM

287  final,24/05/2011.

24  Injunctive relief is a temporary or permanent remedy
allowing the right holder to stop or prevent an infringement of
his/her right.

56  Communication "Unleashing the Potential of Cloud Computing
in Europe", COM(2012)529final.

57  These issues were addressed in the recommendations of
MrAntónio Vitorinoresulting from the mediation on private
copying and reprography levies. You can consult these
recommendations on the following website:

http://ec.europa.eu/intemalmarket/copyright/docs/levy
reform/130131 levies-vitorino-recommendations en.pdf.

