


Public Consultation

on the review of the EU copyright rules

Please identify yourself:

Name:Informations Forlag, St. Kongensgade 40 C, DK-1264
Copenhagen

We are a 65 year old Danish publishing house, we publish
non-fiction literature, approximate 25 new titles a year. Our
turnover is approx 6-7 mio DKK a year. We are a member of the
Danish Publishers Association. We support our associations
position in this matter. The life of our company is depended on
income from copyrights.

Type of respondent(Pleaseunderlinethe appropriate):

Publisher/Producer/Broadcaster

Other(Please explain):

Access to your content across Europe

Why is it not possible to accessmany online content servicesfrom
anywhere in Europe?1.[In particular if you are an end
user/consumer:]Have you faced problems when trying to access
online services in an EU Member State other than the one in
which you live?

YES - Please provide examples indicating the Member State,
the sector and the type of content concerned (e.g. premium
content such as certain films and TV series, audio-visual
content in general, music, e-books, magazines, journals and
newspapers, games, applications and other software)

 NO

NO OPINION

3.[In particular if you area right holder or acollective
management organisation:]Howoftenare youaskedtogrant
multi-territorial licences?Pleaseindicate, if possible,
thenumber of requests per yearand provide examples indicating
the Member State, the sector and the type of content concerned.


[Open question]

Ialmost alwaysgrant multi-territorial licences, which is the
rule inthe book publishing sector.

5.[In particular if you area right holder or acollective
management organisation:]Are there reasons why, even in cases
where you hold all the necessary rights for all the territories
in question, you would still find it necessary or justified to
impose territorial restrictions on a service provider (in
order, for instance, to ensure that access to certain content
is not possible in certain European countries)?

YES – Please explain by giving examples

 NO

NO OPINION

7. Do you think that further measures (legislative or
non-legislative, including market-led solutions) are needed at
EU level to increase the cross-border availability of content
services in the Single Market, while ensuring an adequate level
ofprotection for right holders?

YES – Please explain

 NO – Please explain

This is not needed for the book publishing sector.

NO OPINION

8. Isthe scope of the“making available”right in cross-border
situations – i.e. when content is disseminated across borders
–sufficiently clear?

 YES

NO–Pleaseexplain how this could be clarified and what
typeofclarification would be required(e.g.as in "targeting"
approach explained above,as in "country of origin"approach1

The objective of implementing a “country of origin”approachis to
localise the copyright relevant act that must be licenced in a
single Member State (the "country of origin", which could be
for example the Member State in whichthe content is uploaded or
wherethe service provider is established), regardless of in how
many Member States the work canbe accessed or received. Such an
approachhas already been introduced at EU level with regard to
broadcasting by satellite(seeDirective 93/83/EEC on the
coordination of certain rules concerning copyright and rights
related to copyright applicable to satellite broadcasting and
cable retransmission).

)

NO OPINION

9.[In particular if you are a right holder:]Could
a clarification of the territorial scope of the “making
available” right have an effect on the recognition of your
rights (e.g. whether you are considered to be an author or not,
whether you are considered to have transferred your rights or
not),onyour remuneration, oron the enforcement of rights
(including the availability of injunctive relief2

Injunctive relief is a temporary or permanent remedy allowing
the right holder to stop or prevent an infringement of his/her
right.

)?

YES – Please explain howsuchpotential effectscould
beaddressed

 NO

NO OPINION

10.[In particular if youa service provider or a right
holder:]Does the application of two rights to a single act of
economic exploitation in the online environment (e.g. a
download) create problems for you?

YES – Please explainwhat type of measureswould be needed in
order to address such problems (e.g. facilitation of joint
licences when the rights are in different hands,legislation to
achieve the "bundling of rights")

 NO

NO OPINION

4.Download to own digital content

14.[In particular if you area right holder or a service
provider:] What would bethe consequencesof providing a legal
framework enabling the resale of previously purchased digital
content? Please specify per market (type of content) concerned.

[Open question]

E-booksbeingre-sold and lendunder an exception willhavedramatic
consequence onthemarketand on the whole value-chain of
literature. There is a reason why this can only be done for the
distribution of physical books that bears traces of time and
use, which is not the case with e-books.

Limitations and exceptions in the Single Market

21. Are there problems arising from the fact that most
limitations and exceptions provided in the EUcopyright
directivesare optionalfor the Member States?

YES – Please explain by referring to specific cases

 NO – Please explain

We do not see any problems, as most of the important exceptions
such as teaching, research, libraries orfordisabled personsare
presentin all legislationsacross Europe.

NO OPINION

22. Should some/all of the exceptions be made mandatory and, if
so, is there aneed for a higher level of harmonisation of such
exceptions?

YES–Please explain byreferringto specific cases

 NO – Please explain

This would not be compatible with the respect for cultural and
national traditions which are embedded in our authors’
rights/copyright legislations.

NO OPINION

24. Independently from the questions above, is there a need to
provide for a greater degree of flexibility in the EU
regulatory framework for limitations and exceptions?

YES – Please explain why

 NO – Please explain why

The current wording is flexible enough.

NO OPINION

26.Does the territoriality of limitations and exceptions, in
your experience,constitute a problem?

YES–Please explain why andspecify which exceptions you are
referring to

 NO – Please explain why and specify which exceptions you are
referring to

As publisher we use exceptions such as the exception for
quotation and sell the books across Europe and the rest of the
world. We never encountered problems.

NO OPINION

27.In the event that limitationsand exceptionsestablished at
national level were to have cross-border effect, howshouldthe
question of “fair compensation” be addressed, whensuch
compensation is part of the exception? (e.g. who pays whom,
where?)

[Open question]

It is crucial that exceptions are remunerated. If made
cross-border, we need to decide who pays as this should not
lead to the disappearance of compensations which are owed to
authors and publishers for undermining the commercial
exploitation of our works.

Access to content in libraries and archivesPreservationand
archiving

28.(b)[In particular if you arearightholder:]Have you
experienced problems with the use by libraries, educational
establishments, museum or archives of the preservation
exception?

YES – Please explain, by Member State, sector, and the type
of use in question.

 NO

NO OPINION

Off-premises access to library collections

32.(c)[In particular if you are arightholder:]Have you
negotiated agreements with institutional users that enable
those institutions to provide remote access, including across
borders,to the works or other subject-matter in their
collections, for purposes of research and private study?

[Open question]

In Denmark there are negotiated agreements between libraries and
publishers allowing for remote access to e-books.

Rightsholders have extended collective license agreements with
most educational institutions through Copydan that allow for
the educational institutions to make digital copies available
to the students on a remote access basis.

E –lending

36.(c)[In particular if you are aright holder:]Have you
negotiated agreements with libraries to enable them to lend
books or other materials electronically, including across
borders?

 YES –Please explainwith specific examples

Since 2011 there have been negotiated agreements with public
libraries implying that basically all published e-books are
available to the libraries and to the lenders on a remote
access basis.

NO

NO OPINION

Teaching

42. (b)[In particular if youare aright holder:]Have
youexperienced specificproblems resulting from the wayin which
works or other subject-matter are used for illustration for
teaching, including across borders?

YES–Please explain

 NO

NO OPINION

44. What mechanisms exist in the market place to facilitate the
use of content for illustration for teaching purposes?How
successful are they?

[Open question]

Access is partly provided by our own commercial license schemes
and partly by very well-functioning extended collective
licensing schemes through Copydan that basically imply that all
education institutions have the access to make copies available
both printed and digitally.

Research

47. (b)[In particular if you area right
holder:]Haveyouexperienced specificproblems resulting from the
wayin which works or other subject-matter are usedin
thecontextof research projects/activities, including across
borders?

YES–Please explain

 NO

NO OPINION

49.
===

What mechanisms exist in the Member States to facilitate the use
of content for research purposes? How successful are they?

Copydan licenses with educational institutions supplement the
licenses that the institution can enter into directly with
publishers concerning periodicals and other scientific and
research publications

Disabilities

50. (c)[In particular if you are a rightholder:]Have you
experienced specificproblems resulting fromthe application of
limitations or exceptions allowing for the
distribution/communication of works published in special
formats, including across borders?

YES–Please explainby giving examples

 NO

NO OPINION

52.
===

What mechanisms exist in the market place to facilitate
accessibility to content? How successful are they?

[Open question]

Thanks to ePub3, we manage to make many more e-books accessible.

We publish every new title(approx 25 every year)in ePub3-format
and havepublished approx 40backlist-titles, and moreto come

Text and data mining

53. (c)[In particular if you are a rightholder:]Have you
experienced specificproblems resulting fromthe use of text and
data mining in relation to copyright protected content,
including across borders?

YES–Please explain

 NO – Please explain

When asked, publishers are giving authorisation to genuine and
honest requests coming from non-commercial researchers. We
provide to give licences under standard terms and at no
additional costs. Publishers also allow TDM for commercial
players but this will be under different licensing terms.

NO OPINION

55.If your view is thatadifferent solutionisneeded, what would
it be?

[Open question]

Supporting STM initiative such as Cross Ref’s Prospect.
(http://www.crossref.org/).

57.Are there other issues, unrelated to copyright, that
constitute barriers to the use of text or data mining methods?

[Open question]

Setting up of a specific technical environment which you may not
have already (such as an API, where the researcher may download
the content before mining it, which is not cost-free). An
exception will not be helpful to manage technical issues.

User-generated content
======================

58.(c)[In particular if you are a right holder:]Have you
experienced problems resulting from the way the users are using
pre-existing works or other subject-matter to disseminate new
content on the Internet, including across borders?

 YES – Please explain by giving examples

 NO

NO OPINION

59.(a)[In particular if you are an end user/consumer or aright
holder:]Have you experienced problems when trying to ensure
that the work you have created (on the basis of pre-existing
works) is properly identified for online use?Are proprietary
systems sufficient in this context?

 YES – Please explain

 NO– Please explain

Our work benefits from the ISBNnumber. When we create a work
based on pre-existing work either we rely on the quotation or
parody exception or we clear the rights with the original
rightholders. We have always proceeded so and believe that no
change in legislation is needed.

NO OPINION

Fairremuneration of authors and performers

73. Is there a need to act at the EU level (for instance to
prohibit certain clauses in contracts)?

YES–Please explain

 NO – Please explain why

There are already good provisions to ensure that contracts are
balanced and not abusive. Contractual law is a national
competence and we do not see the need to create a EU
contractual law covering copyright contract.

NO OPINION

Respectforrights

75. Shouldthe civil enforcement system in the EU be rendered
more efficient for infringements of copyright committed with a
commercial purpose?

 YES–Please explain

We are satisfied with the current legislation but this could be
improved.

Websites infringing copyright can come across as non-commercial
but there are many elements that makes the non-commercial
characteristic dubious (advertisement, loss in sales, etc).

NO–Please explain

NO OPINION

76.In particular,isthe current legal framework clear enough to
allow for sufficient involvement of intermediaries (such as
Internet service providers, advertising brokers, payment
service providers, domain name registrars, etc.) in inhibiting
online copyright infringements with a commercial purpose? If
not, whatmeasureswould be useful to foster the cooperation of
intermediaries?

[Open question]

We would find it beneficial if some intermediaries such as
advertisers, payment services, domain name registrars and
search engine who benefit from pirate website and piracy in
general would be encourage to cooperate more.

77.Does the current civil enforcement framework ensure that the
right balance is achieved between the right to have one’s
copyright respected and other rights such as the
protectionofprivate life and protection of personal data?

YES–Please explain

 NO–Please explain

Both should be respected, but one should not take over the
other, and protection of private life and personal data should
not prevent to be able to enforce our intellectual property
rights.

NO OPINION

