


PUBLIC CONSULTATION ON THE REVIEW OF THE
EU COPYRIGHTACQUIS

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

I.EBU CALLS FOR IMPROVEMENT OF THELICENSING PROCESS
FORMULTI-PLATFORMAND CROSS-BORDERUSE

Online media services offered by EU-based organisations
needarobustlegal frameworkthatprovideslegal
certaintyformulti-platform and cross-border use of protected
works and related subject matter and thatfacilitates rights
clearancefor such services. The focus of the EU copyrightreview
shouldnot be on changing the basic structure of the framework
itself, but onstreamlining theprocessof rights clearance.

If this is not feasible for all online media services, then at
the very least these objectives should be applied
tobroadcast-related online services.1

 "Media services" hereafter mean all audiovisual media services
subject to the AVMS Directive as well as
"radio-like"(audio-only)services offered by EU-based
organisations."Broadcast-related" media services are
thoseonline media services that are provided by and under the
control and responsibility of a broadcasterand whichhave a
clear relationship with the broadcaster’s linear broadcast
services.

The EBU haskey proposals that would effectively helpstreamline
thelicensing process,thereby ensuringthat audience needs are
met, whilereducingthe dead-weight administrative burdenof
rights clearanceandreleasing funds for investment innewcontent
and services.

A.  Clarification of the "making available" right

The Commission should clarify the relevant place of the act
ofmaking availablefor all online media services, or as a
minimum for broadcast-related online services.

The most suitable solution isto takethe"injection rule"contained
in the Sat-Cab Directive which clarifies the place where the
communication (by satellite) takes place,as a model and adapt
it to coverother EU-basedmedia services, or at
leastbroadcast-related online services.This would
safeguardthelegal and contractualconditions that have helped
cross-border services to flourishin Europe.

The extendedinjection rulewould also
fostercross-borderportableaccesstoEU-based media services,
whilst providingde factocross-border effect toexceptions and
limitationsin line with current, common sense practices(asbased
on the application of domestic laws).

B.  Retransmission over non-cable platforms

The Commission should extend the special rights clearance
systemof the Sat-Cab Directivefor the licensing of
simultaneouscableretransmission of broadcaststo other third
party platformswhere suchsimultaneousretransmission take place
under similar circumstances.

Thisspecificlicensingsystem for cable retransmissionis applied
all over Europe. Equality of treatment, legal certainty and
compliance withcopyright principles justify atechnologically
neutral applicationof this system to similar cases of programme
retransmission over closed platforms. This systemis already
applied in several Member Statesandwould notably concern IPTV,
mobile telephony and terrestrial or satellite platforms
("bouquets").

C.  Broadcasters' on-demand services on third-party platforms

New media platform operatorsalso wish to be licensedfor
thenon-linearuse of broadcasters' programming.Therefore,
theCommission shouldfacilitatethe licensing process where a
broadcastercanoffer itson-demand serviceswhich areclearly
relatedto itslinear programme services tosuchthirdparty
platforms,for examplethrough clearance of
theunderlyingrightsviathe system of "extended collective
licensing"(ECL),which includesappropriate safeguards throughthe
ability to "opt-out" that preservesthe contractual freedom of
right-holders.

ThroughtheECL system, abroadcastercangrant itsownrights
individually, whilst theunderlying on-demand rights (i.e.
theremaining or residualrights in the programme that arenot
held by the broadcaster itself) are cleared througha
voluntarily agreed collective licensing scheme.For this
proposal to be effective, it requires the ECL scheme to be
available in the Member States from where the third-party
platform operates.In countries where this systemhas been
implemented, theconcept has provedto be successful,withright
holders receiving new remuneration.

However, some EBU Members felt that at least insofar as
thethird-partyre-use concerns broadcasters'catch-upservices,the
EU framework should allow foramandatorycollective licensing
system for the underlying rights,similar asexistsfor the
simultaneous cable retransmissionof foreign channels (see B
above),becausethose services involveexactly the same programmes
as previously broadcast.

D.  Need for protection of content and signal integrity

The EU shouldextend the broadcaster's neighbouring rightto
protect its signals against commercial overlays and screen
modifications or other parasitic business models by third
parties. This protection is important for the credibility and
reputation ofthe media service provider,the trust which
individual end-users place in particularEUmedia services, and
ultimatelythe freedom of information of citizens and the
protection of the rights of others.

E.  Broadcasters' archives

In order forPublicServiceMedia (PSM)to make their archive
productions available onlinewithin their public service remit,a
national legislative solutionis needed (in countries where
itdoes not yet exist). As solutions based onextended collective
licensinghave provedto be useful in unlocking archives, the EU
shouldfoster,through a general "frameworkprovision",the
adoptionof ECLinto national lawby individual Member
States(thus,notintroducingan "EU-wide ECL"). The cross-border
effectofsuchnational solutionsresults from the EBU
proposal(under A) to clarifythe place where the act of making
available takes place.

II.EXCEPTIONS,LIMITATIONSAND OTHER ISSUES

Incidental reproductions: If the reproduction right isonlyofan
ancillary naturetowards another right governing one and the
same economic activity, such as broadcasting or on-demand use,
thatactivity should subject to one licence only; a reproduction
that is merely necessary to prepare the core activity should
have no independent relevance.

Flexibilityof limitations and exceptions:EBU Members in several
Member States feel that serious thought should be given to
adapting existing exceptions or limitationson the national
levelwhere such need would exist with respect to specifically
identified cases. However, EBU Members in other countries felt
that no such need would exist on their territory. In any event,
EBU Members do not favour the creation of an US-like "fair use"
clause, as such an open-ended clause would arguably cause too
much legal uncertainty.

Copying for private use:The private copying exception was never
intended to cover large-scale copyingand long-term storage(with
the help of new technologies), allegedly on behalf of
individuals, butprimarily for commercial purposes.Suchpractice
underminesthecontinued broadcasters'investment in original and
high quality programmingand conflicts with their own non-linear
services. The EBU wouldthereforewelcome a clarificationthat the
exception cannot be misused by commercial entities.

Hyperlinking:The EBU welcomes theoutcomeof the recent judgment
by the European Court in theSvenssoncase that a mere hyperlink
to predominantly text-based online publications is not a
communication to the public under Article 3(1) of the 2001
Copyright (InfoSoc) Directive. However, as the matter
ofembeddingorframing(in particular of audio or video streams
provided by another website) involves aneconomic
exploitationwhichismarkedly different from mere hyperlinking,
the EBU should like to reserve its position on such types of
communicationpendingthe forthcoming judgment
intheBestwatercase.

Identifiers: The EBU opposes amandatoryimplementation of
standard identifiers.Anyadoption of identifiers should come in
response to a business need, following a cost-benefit analysis.
This can alsoserve as an incentive toinnovation.

Term of protection:The 2011 Term Extension Directive remains an
inappropriate measure.There should beno further increase in the
termof protection.

Text/data mining:Merely exploring texts and datato discovernew
insights, patterns and trends should be regarded astemporary
copyingand not subject to the reproduction right.

User-Generated-Content (UGC):The EBU seesno need at presentfor a
legislative change by introducing an exception specifically
targetingUGC.Proposals forthe introduction ofa new, general
exceptionforso-called "transformative use"seem to
beexcessiveandcould easily lead toabuse.

Enforcement:For civil law cases concerning IPR infringements,
model rules forfast track proceedingsshould be established.
Model rulesshould also existfor small claims proceedings.

_________________

INTRODUCTION

A. KEY POLICY OBJECTIVES2

 The EBU reply takes account of the recent legalStudy on the
Application of the InfoSoc Directiveas published by the law
firm de Wolf & Partners on 18 December 2013 (hereafter called
"the Legal Study"), but does not comment on the study unless
specifically stated.

TheEBU sharesthe Commission'sview
thattheconsultationshouldfocuson the new means of distributing
content, i.e. on new platforms (and) regardless of geographical
borders.As citizens today expect to have access to
contentanytime, anywhere,theCommission raises
thecrucialquestionofwhy it is not possible to access many
online content services from anywhere in Europe? Thisquestion
clearlyinvolves alsoaccess to contentviamobile networks
andportable devices.

TheEBU also agrees with the Commissionthat the copyright rules
should "support creation and innovation, tap the full potential
of the Single Market, foster growth and investment in our
economy andpromote cultural diversity", and that it is
important to "facilitate licensing, while ensuring a high level
protection of intellectual property rights."(emphasis added).

Obviously, these aims will have consequences in particular for
the issues ofterritoriality and fragmentationof the EU
copyright market, which arethe core ofthe questionnaire.

Therefore, as today's media convergencehas far-reaching
implications,the European copyright framework must
beappropriate andadaptedin order to be "fit for purpose" in the
new media environment.

At the same time,focussing on media services implies thatthese
issues cannot be treated in isolation, but must
becloselyrelated to theoverall policy ofEuropean media
regulation which pursuesthe same Single Market aims.The
Television without Frontiers (TwF) Directive was designed in
1989 to provide a common framework for all EU-based
broadcasting organisations so that the availability of
broadcast services in Member States other than where the
service originated was not unduly hindered by differences
innational media regulation. The adoption of this
Directivewaslateraccompaniedbythe introduction ofcertain
copyright rules in the Satellite and Cable (Sat-Cab) Directive
of 1993 in order to establish, for the benefit ofEU-based media
service providers,legal certaintyfor satellite broadcasting
services andfacilitating rights clearancefor the cable
retransmission of foreign radio or television channels.

The European Court hasstressed thatthese rules werenecessary to
create "a single programme production and distribution market"
in the EU3

 CJEU, 4 October 2011,Premier League v. QC Leisure, Joined
Cases C‑403/08 and C‑429/08 at nr. 121.

and thus to ensure,vianew and appropriate copyright rules,that
the aims of the TwF Directive were not made obsolete.4

 See also Recital 12 Sat-Cab Directive: "Whereas the legal
framework for the creation of a single audiovisual area laid
down in Directive 89/552/EEC must, therefore, be supplemented
with reference to copyright."

The same situationexists today. The new Audiovisual Media
Services (AVMS) Directive(2007)enlarged the scope of the TwF
Directive to include"TV-like" online servicesprovidedby EU
media service providers, while maintainingthe
"country-of-establishment"principle aswell asthe Single Market
objectivesof the TwFfornew services. Consequently,the
principles of the Sat-Cab Directive should also be extended -by
the most appropriate legislative measure-so astocover these new
services and tofacilitatelicensingin orderto support
theconsumer-friendly availabilityof EU media services5

 "Media services" hereafter mean all audiovisual media services
subject to the AVMS Directive as well as "radio-like" audio-only
services offered by EU-based organisations.

onallnew platforms and across(EU)borders.6

 A recent resolution by the European Parliament of 4 July 2013
on "Connected TV" (available
athttp://www.europarl.europa.eu/sides/getDoc.do?type=TA&reference=P7-TA-2013-0329&language=EN&ring=A7-2013-0212)
raised the issue of the availability and accessibility of
content in a media-converging world.

The focus of the EU copyright review should thereforenotbe on
changing the basic structure of the legal framework itself, but
onstreamlining theprocessof rights clearance.

B. EUROPEAN (PUBLIC SERVICE) BROADCASTERS' TASKS AND CHALLENGES

EBU Members have a mission to offer quality content to their
audiences in a multiplatform environment and they must respond
to thisconstantly evolvingconsumer demand. Public Service Media
(PSM)have therefore strengthened their onlinepresence over the
pastyears, and most PSM offer both catch-up and live streaming
of radio and television programming on their own websitesas
well as related online-only content.In parallel, PSM also offer
mobile services: many have set up special websites offering
content tailored to mobile phones, as well as branded smart
phone applications. As the penetration of smart phones and
tabletsgrows, interest in applications with broadcasters'
programming, on-demand or live, is rising.

In its replyto the European Commission'sGreen Paper on
Convergence("Preparing for a Fully Converged Audiovisual
World:Growth, Creation and Values"), the EBU stressed (inter
alia)thatsustained investment in original content will be
meaningless without additional steps to ensure wide and easy
access to such content for all audiences, across the growing
range of distributionplatforms(see the ExecutiveSummaryof the
EBU reply to that Green Paper,attachedhereto
asanAnnexe).Reaping the full benefits ofmediaconvergence also
implies that the best possible combination of broadcast and
broadband technologies is made.Reaching all audiences with
diverse content lies at the heart of the model of public
servicemedia.The easily available media content from PSMalso
supports the continued availability of culturally-and
linguistically-diverse content.EBU Members therefore strongly
believe in content distribution models which enable as many
citizens as possible to access a plurality of media content.

Consequently,in order to offer consumers easy access to
broadcasters' online services on whatever type of
device,broadcasters' access tonewplatformsand servicesshould
notbe hampered by
copyrightmanagementissues.Broadcasters'taskofprovidingnewaudioand
audiovisualprogramming on a dailybasisinvolves an
incomparablyhighintensity of rights management, and this task
is already reflected inexisting copyright rules. Thecomplex
framework of rights clearance for broadcasters' onlineservices
needs to bemade coherent withthoseotherrules.

In this context, it isalsoimportant to highlight that,on top of
the various cultural and social aspects of the EU media
market,the variety ofEuropeanbroadcasters' contractual
practices need to be taken into account. This isof crucial
importanceasbroadcasters' programming not only
involvemultipleunderlying rights(including thosenot managed by
the broadcasteritself), but alsobecause the media eco-system
depends on appropriate economic rewards forthere-use of
broadcasters' programmes. Broadcasters license their programmes
to other media providersacross manyterritories.
Suchrevenueisreinvested in new PSMcontent which helpsto create
a virtuous circle thatbenefitsbothaudiences and the European
creative sector.This mixed ecology of public service content in
Europe needs continuous support,as otherwise incentives for
creating originalprogramme content are weakened andthe
underlying right-holders are deprived of potential
remuneration.Thesespecificaspectsof European media services
have been duly respected by the Sat-Cab Directiveandneed to be
maintained.

For thesereasons,any barriers
forEU-operatedmediaservices,includingobstaclesdue to copyright,
should be avoided or at least minimised.The aim of a truly
Single Market for programming from broadcasters in the EU
willnever be realised ifhybrid TV systems, mobile and tablet
devices("portable content") do not provide EU citizens with
easy access to such programmingand to therelatedonline
services.7

"Broadcast-related" media services are thoseonline media
services that are provided by and under the control and
responsibility of a broadcasterand whichhave a clear
relationship with the broadcaster’s linear broadcast services.

Similarly, pursuing a merelytechnicalEU-wideinteroperabilityof
hybrid TV sets andother new media deviceswould be meaningless
if, for reasons of cumbersome rights clearances, those devices
cannot show both the programmes and the related online
services.

Moreover, incaseswhere content cannot be offered legally, itwill
be offered through piracy.This result is clearlynot
satisfactory, in particular asa recent study came tothe
conclusion that 80% ofEuropean end-users would be prepared to
pay for lawful andaffordablecontent.8

SeeEuropean citizens and intellectual property: perception,
awareness and behaviour, published by the Office of the
Harmonisation in the Internal Market, November 2013, page 56.

Therefore,after almost ten years ofenquiries and consultations
related to Content Online,"doing nothing"isnotan option:Rights
clearance forthe multiplatform and cross-borderdistribution of
EU programmes and related online servicesby EU-based
mediaservice providersmust bemade easier.

Broadcasters provide both content and services;in thefivelargest
EU markets, PSM invest over10 billion Euros in content every
year and on averagetwo-thirdsof PSM programming consists of own
or commissioned productions.For this reason, facilitating
licensing is not simply about the broadcasting sector alone, it
isalso essential tothecompetitiveness of the entire EU
audiovisual industry,for economicgrowth and employment,and,
ultimately, formaintaining consumers' respect for copyrightby
offering easy and affordable access to content of European
origin.

REPLY TO SELECTED QUESTIONS

2. Have you faced problems when seeking to provide online
services across borders in the EU?

Yes, there is alack of legal certainty and technological
neutrality for effective licensing.There are three areasthat
create legal obstacles for cross-border media services:

A.The general lack of legal certainty for(1)(all)online media
communications, and(2)in particular for broadcasters'services;

B.The limitation of the special licensing regime for the
simultaneous retransmission of broadcasts to cable platforms
only, and

C.The need for streamlining the licensing process for the re-use
of PSM's on-demand services on third-party platforms.

A.Lackof legal certainty for online mediacommunications

1) General comments

The Commission mentions thattheterritoriality principleof
copyrightis being interpretedin the sense thatit would "require
authorisation in each national territory in which content is
communicated to the public".This interpretationimplies that
wherever (in the world) an online service
isaccessible,possiblythecopyrightlaws ofeach of
thoseterritories would be applicableto that service.Thisthreat
of ubiquitous liabilityillustrates the core of the
problem:foronlinemedia services, there isno legal certaintyin
assessing which country's law should be relevant for applying
copyright.No online media service provider would be able to
determine with sufficient certainty which (different)lawswould
apply to its online service.

Given the complexity of copyrightin the EU,most media service
providers residing in the EU wouldbe inclined to base their
rights clearance administration mainly on the copyright law
they know best,i.e.their domestic law.In fact, it can be
presumed thatfor themajority of websitesthis is the standard
practice today.

A truly borderless Single Market for copyright protected content
would arguably require afull harmonisationof copyrightthrough a
Regulation that would create one, unitary,EU-widecopyright
title. However, suchadrastic move would not only conflictwith
right-holders' practices but could also go beyond the interests
of many, perhaps even most, copyright userswho seekflexibility
as to which rights they wish to obtain and for which audiences.

In the same waythatflexibility is offeredto European providers
of cable and satellite broadcast servicesby the Sat-Cab
Directive(which did notalterthe substantive law), enhancing
legal certainty for EUonlinemedia services will help to
streamline the rightsclearance process.This, in turn, will help
the European online market to flourish whilst increasing the
competitiveness ofthe European audiovisual sector.

Astricterapplication of the territoriality principle in the
EUwould be counter-productive,as that would imply thatall28
national copyright laws, including for example provisions
relating to collective rights management, shouldbe taken into
account,cumulatively, with respect toanytype ofonline
communication of a copyright protected work. If that assumption
were true worldwide, thenmillions ofunintentionalcopyright
infringements would take place on a daily basis.Ultimately,
this would render copyright practically unenforceable.

Moreover, such a strict territoriality approach would
re-introduce borders in the EU that had previously been
abolished by the Sat-Cab Directive.After all, if thework is
embedded in a radio or TV programme of a satellite broadcasting
service which can be received throughout the whole EU, the
relevant act of communication tothe public takes place inone
countryonly.Astrict territoriality approachiswill
thereforenotpromoteEU media services.

2)The specificity of broadcasters' programming services

Thelegaldifficultiesreferred toabove areparticularly cumbersome
and costlyforbroadcasters' programmingservices.In order to
clear the necessary rights, broadcasters conclude individual
agreements (e.g. with film producers), collective agreements
(e.g. concerning the embedded/underlying rights, such as music)
as well as a mixtureof both.A single, 30-minute episode of a
TV-series can easily involve up toahundred contributions.9

See the examples of the EBU reply to the Green Paper on the
online distribution of audiovisual works in the EU,
athttp://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/consultations/2011/audiovisual/registered-organisation/ebu-uer_en.pdf.

For the many forms of material that broadcasters include in
their programming, thedaily and intensiverights clearance by
the broadcaster is always based onthe domesticcopyrightlaw of
the broadcaster's residence. Domestic law is also the reference
for legal assessments as to whether a certain use would meet the
conditions of an exception or limitation (e.g.a quotation or a
news report).

The usualoverspill of broadcasts into neighbouring countries is
not relevantfor the question ofapplicable law, since mere
reception of a broadcast is not a copyright relevant act. The
same should apply to themere reception of an
on-demandservice.Asbroadcasters must usethe same approach
towards rights clearance for their online programming services,
this renders the newly introduced concept of "multi-territorial
licensing" generally ill-equipped forbroadcasters' servicesin
cases where these are merely accessible.10

 This was alsorecognised by therecentCollective Rights
Management Directive, see below under Question 4 (A.2).
Thiswould of course not exclude that in cases where a
broadcaster wishes to provide a truly pan-European service
addressing the general public of all countries involved it may
consider obtaining such type of licence.

Example:

Broadcasters create news reports. The broadcast and online use
of any 10-minutes' news report isoftenproduced on the basis of
several exceptions, such asephemeral recordings,use of a work
in connection with the reporting of a current event, a
political speech, a work located in a public place,quotations,
and the incidental inclusion of a work visible in aprivate
house. These exceptionscan allbe subject todifferent conditions
in each Member State.Moreover, legal assessments under copyright
regarding news reports must be taken within an extremely narrow
time frame, sometimes "on thespot".Therefore, in daily practice
theexceptionfor news reportscan be problematic, notably in
caseswhere the work itself is the event, and in particularwhen
theinterpretation of this exception under national law is (too)
restrictive.Asnationalbroadcasters produce and transmit multiple
news programmes throughout the wholeday, it would be
practicallyimpossible todo soif the broadcaster could not rely
on the (sole) applicability of its domestic copyright law.This
is valid both for broadcasters' linear as for their non-linear
services.

With respect tosatellite broadcasting, theaim of the Sat-Cab
Directive was notto change this legal situationfor broadcasting
servicesbut merelyto confirmthe rights clearancepractice by
providing legal certainly for (another) form of cross-border
availability of radio and TV services.It is indisputable that
this Directive hasprovedto bean effective measure for
facilitating satellite broadcastingwithout having negative
effects for the right-holders concerned: The satellite
injection rule enabled numerous unencrypted satellite
broadcasts in Europe to proliferate and has been helpful in
increasing the availability of broadcasts across borders.11

 In the 28 EU countries plus Turkey, there are more than 4,500
TV channels broadcast over satellite. In thePremier
Leaguecase(see Fn. 3), the Advocate-General stressed that if
the Sat-Cab Directive had not clarified the injection rule for
satellite broadcasting, such services would have been
practically impossible.

It also allowed those broadcasters who wanted and couldafford to
provide a trulycross-border service to do so.

However,a broadcasterthatwishes to use the same programmes on
online platforms or othernewforms of cross-border usecannot
benefit fromsuch legal certaintyin determining which law
isrelevant for applying copyright. This situation must be
remedied.

Example:

Between Finland and Sweden, there is a small group ofislands
called Åland, which for along timewas part of Sweden, butsince
1917 officiallybelongsto Finland. Nevertheless, it has an
autonomous status, and Swedish is still its official language.
This explains the popularity of SVT's broadcast programmes
whichare freely accessible inÅland via simultaneous
retransmission over local cable and IPTV, both based on the
cable retransmission regime of the Sat-Cab Directive, i.e.with
the authorisation of SVTfor the broadcasters' own and acquired
rightsand the Finnish collecting society(Kopiosto)for other
rightholders. However, since there is no legislative certainty
under the current EU copyright rules with respect to SVT's own
online services, the population in Åland does not have full
access to SVT's onlinecatch-up services (provided through "SVT
Play"). As those catch-up services include the same programmes
received in Åland via the abovementioned retransmission scheme,
this discrepancy is impossible tojustify for the Åland citizens.

B.Simultaneous retransmission of broadcastsis facilitated only
for cable platforms

One ofthe most urgent licensing issuesneeding a legislative
solution is thesimultaneousretransmission of
broadcasters'programmes via third-party platformsother than
cable,i.e. through subscription-based or
registration-basedonlineplatforms (so-called "closed network"
systems), such as IPTV or mobile network services. While the
Sat-Cab Directive of 1993 introduced, with the aim of
stimulatingcross-border media services, an efficientcollective
rights clearance system for the simultaneous cable
retransmission of broadcasts, it was never adapted to cater for
similar Internet-based services.

In the absence of a technologically neutral application of the
cable rights clearance provisions, the retransmission of linear
programmes on theInternet-based services wouldneedto be done via
individual rights clearances which is particularly complex, and
in practical terms even impossible, if this would not
becomplemented bycollective licensing.As a result,there is no
level playing field between different third-party platforms
which often have a very similar business model, such as cable
and IPTV.

Examples:

The Sat-Cab Directive is implemented differently across Europe.
While in some countries simultaneous retransmission of
broadcast programmes on other-than-cablethird-party platforms
is legally assimilated to cable retransmission (e.g.
Belgium,Sweden, Denmark, and in contractual practices also in
the Netherlands), this is not the case in other Member States,
such as in Germany and Poland.

In Germany, regarding the simultaneous retransmission of
broadcast programmes via the Internet to (domestic)
subscribers, a Hamburg court decided (on 8 April 2009) that the
cable retransmission licensing system under the German copyright
law did not allow a technologically neutral interpretation,
becausethe law remains subject to a decision by the German
legislator. This means that the collective licensing part of
that system is not applicable, rendering the individual
licensing part obsolete. German broadcasters like ARD and ZDF
are thus facing legal challenges in granting permission
fortheir servicestobe retransmitted over IPTV,mobile and
"TV-to-go" networks.

In Poland, out of a total of 13,7 million households, there are
4,6 million users of cable and over 6 million of users of
digital satellite platforms (over 60% of all pay-TV). Under
competition law, in particular in major merger cases, these
services are treated as substitutes and thus belonging to the
same relevant market. Under Articles 41-46 of
thePolishBroadcasting Act, a technologically neutral regime
applies to all operators of retransmission services. However,
under thePolishCopyright Act, the simplified rights clearance
system based on collective management of retransmission rights
applies only to cable operators.

C.Re-use of PSM's on-demand services is not possible without
collective licences

Broadcasters increasingly offer on-demand serviceswhich are
clearly related totheir linear programmes (e.g. catch-up TV)
and have become part of the regular offeringof broadcasters.
This on-demand consumption of broadcast programmes is quickly
becoming a standard feature of audiovisual media services.
These services can be offered by the broadcaster itself, but
are increasingly demanded bythird partiesso that they can be
included in commercial (subscription- or advertising-based)
offers toconsumers in that third party's territory (which may
be different from that of the broadcaster).

Unfortunately, effective rights management solutions for these
services to be licensed to third party platforms arenot
available. Without some form of collective licensing of the
underlying rightsof the programme concerned, a
broadcaster’son-demand services cannot be included ina
third-party's (often subscription-based) Internet, mobile or
hybrid services.

Examples:

In Germany, there is a cleardemand from platform operators to
offerbroadcasters' non-linear services ("Mediatheken") complete
and unchanged alongside their linear programmes. However,in
practicebroadcasters like ARD or ZDF or transnational
broadcasters like ARTE cannot grant the rights to their
services with the necessary legal safeguards against
so-called"outsiders"ifthe underlying programme rights are not
dealt with collectively.

Similarly, France Télévisions can only offeravery limited part
of its on-demand offer (via its catch-up platformwww.pluzz.fr)
for use outside France.

4. If you have identified problems in the answers to any of the
questions above – what would be the best way to tackle them?

In this context, the EBU would like to reiterate and further
explain its proposals for reducing the fragmentation of,
orterritorial limitations to, media services in the EUwhere
this is related to complex licensing processes.12

 Some of these proposals were already developed in the 2010 EBU
White Paper on Copyright, which is available
athttp://www3.ebu.ch/cms/en/policies/initiatives/copyright.

In sum, the EBU proposes that the Commissionshould:

A.clarifytheact ofthe making available right(ormore preciselythe
country where the relevant act ofsuchcommunication takes place)
forEUmedia services;13

 For recent support for the proposal to apply the "satellite
injection rule" to online services, see the Lisbon Council
Policy Brief of 30.5.2013, by Prof. Hargreaves/Prof.Hugenholtz,
available
athttp://gallery.mailchimp.com/e11b949d8350120e252700029/files/LisbonCouncil_policybrief_FIN2_web.pdf.

this should be doneat least (i.e.as a minimum)for
broadcast-relatedonlineservices;

B.extend the specialrights clearance system for the licensing of
simultaneouscableretransmission of broadcasts, by applying it in
atechnologically neutral manner to other platformswhere such
retransmission takesplace under similar circumstances,and

C.promote theavailability of broadcasters' on-demand services,
which are clearly relatedto their linear programmes,on third
party platforms, for example via the system of "extended
collective licensing",with the appropriate safeguards to
preservethe contractual freedom of right-holders.

D.  create advantages of promoting the"portability"of media
content, by implementingtheaforementioned EBU proposals.

See also the repliestoQuestions 6, 7, 8 & 9

A.Clarifyingthe act of the making available rightfor EU media
services

1)New rule resulting in the law of the country-of-establishment
of the media service provider

As explained above, itmakes practical sense to takethe satellite
rulecontained in the Sat-Cab Directiveasabasic model, and adapt
it to cover all EU-based media services.After all, the
satellite rule was specifically intended to eradicate legal
uncertainty and avoid the cumulative application of several
national laws to one single broadcastingact receivable all over
Europe.Extending the rule to EU-based media services would
clarify the place where such communications takes place and
provide the samelevel oflegal certainty.

The practical resulthereofshould be that the law applicable to
the licence given to the media service provider for its online
media services should bethe law of the country in which the
media service provider is established.For media service
providersas defined in Article 1(a) AVMS Directive, this would
obviously be the country of establishmentunder the criteria of
Article 2(3) AVMS Directive.This clarification would confer a
truly cross-border effect to the licence for the use of all
works and other protected subject-matteras integral parts of
the online media service.14

The same result should apply in practice to "radio-like" media
services by EU-based operators (i.e. where the musical
worksareintegral partsof the online media service).

2)A policy decision to distinguishingbetween "broadcast-related"
and other online services?

While the EBU would have no objection for its proposed solution
to cover all online services,as a minimum(as will be
explainedbelow) it should cover"broadcast-related"
onlinemediaservices.Withinthe plethora ofonline media
services,should policy makers see the need for a more targeted
extension of the satelliteinjection rule, the EBU would
consider there to be a reasonable case
fordistinguishing"broadcast-related"online services - which are
those online media services that are provided by and under the
control and responsibility of a broadcaster andcharacterised by
the fact that there isa clear relationship between the
broadcaster's linear (analogue or digital) service and its
on-demand service- fromotheronlinecontent services which
areretail-likeand mostly provided byInternet-onlyoperators.

Thereare obvious reasons for treating broadcast-related on-line
services differently from "retail-like"on-demand services:

It isessential for broadcasters to clear broadcasting rights
together with the online rightsforboththeir linear programmes
andbroadcast-related online services.Broadcastershave a
uniquelyhuge administrative taskin clearing rights. Thisis
reflected in several legal provisions of international and EU
copyright law.These tasks are cumbersome and costly-not only
for their broadcastusebutalso for their online services. By
exempting the collective licensing of online music rights to
broadcasters from the multi-territorial licensing regime, the
Commission has recognised thatfragmentation of
rightsclearancewould be detrimental to the broadcasting sector
and thereforebroadcasterscancontinue to clear both broadcast
and online rights with the same collecting society. In
itsCISACdecision,by acknowledging that national broadcasters
haveshowntheirinterest in maintaining thepossibility
ofone-stop-shopblanket licensing,the European Courtimplicitly
confirms that approach.15

 CJEU,CISAC v European Commission, Case T-442/08. See Art. 32of
the Directive on collective rights management,2012/0180(COD).

Recent case law of the European Court:In thePremier
Leaguecasethe Courtheldthe freedom ofbroadcastservicesasa
higher ranking principle than the possibility of granting
exclusive licences per territory.16

 See Footnote 3.

This decision notonly recalls thecommitment to create a Single
Market forbroadcast programmes but also justifies the need to
apply aseparate licensing frameworkto broadcast and (radio- or)
TV-like media services, i.e.differentfrom the licensing ofmedia
services which arenotcovered by the TwF (now AVMS) Directive.
This is an absolutely critical point which did not obtain
sufficient attention in the Legal Study.

As a resultofEuropean case law,the principle of territoriality
with respect to the right of "communication to the public"can
be maintained only if it is applied in ways that would
facilitate, rather than hinder, the free flow of media services
in the EU.

Furthermore, it should not be overlooked that broadcasters are
AVMS providers and thus characterised by their exercise
ofeditorial responsibilityover the selection and the
organisation of their programmes andservices, and they assume
fulllegal and editorial liabilityfor everything communicated by
them. As AVMS providers, broadcasters are also subject to many
other obligations, including for the production or distribution
of European works. By contrast, providers of retail-like
services are oftenonline-onlyoperators which assert that their
activity is limited to the "mere provision of a technical
platform", without assuming full editorial responsibility for
the content made available thereon, and in that wayfalling
outsidethe AVMS regime(and its obligations).

(3)Safeguards against "delocalisation"

TheLegal Study suggests that for on-demand servicesin generalthe
country-of-origin concept includes a risk of "location
shopping", i.e. the on-demand service provider could seek to
create the closest connection of its services with a
pre-selected Member State or evenoutside the EU; and such
location-shoppingcould, in theory, negatively affect the
possibilities for right holders to obtain fair
remuneration.This pointrequires several comments. While it is
justified to deemthe location of theserver,from which the
online service is technically offered,aslargely irrelevant -
especially with the rise of "cloud"-based storage services -for
broadcast-related servicesit would seem far-fetchedto assume
that such delocalisation would take place, for the following
reasons:

The right of communication to the public is harmonised EU-wide.
Therefore,it is doubtfulwhethertheriskof
delocalisationisreallysubstantial foron-demand services
provided by any type of media entity.(The Legal Study did
notmake adifferentiationbetween media entities.)

In practice, the country of residence ofmedia entitiesis rarely
(if at all) chosen for reasons of copyright law.Various forms
of taxes, enterprise culture, local competition, language,
conditions of the local labour market, safety, government
economic incentives, etcetera, are far more
compellingconsiderations formedia entities to selectan EU-based
residence;

The satellite rule includes the principle, as stated in Recital
17 of the Sat-Cab Directive, thatactual and potential
audiencein other Member States need to be taken into account
for thelevel of remuneration.Evidence of targeting the general
population of a foreign, ratherthan the domestic, country (mere
accessibility is not enough) could be considered relevant for
determining the level of remuneration.Thisprinciple would
clearly reduce the possibly negative effects
ofanydelocalisation.

With particular respect to broadcasters' services,theargument of
delocalisationis not new and provedoverestimated.Sucha
concernwas raised when the satellite injection rule was
enacted, butevidence of a broadcaster moving its location to
another country purely for copyright reasons is non-existent.
All EU-based media service providers (except for Internet-only
providers not subject to the AVMS Directive) are already
subject to anti-circumvention rules in the Sat-Cab Directive
(both radio and television broadcasters) and the AVMS
Directive. If it were deemed appropriate to apply the satellite
injection rulesolelyto broadcast-related online services,there
is no need for an additional set of attachment rules which
would make it more complicated than necessary.

Nevertheless, right-holders entitlement to appropriate
remuneration is a fundamental principle under copyright law.
Therefore,if the satellite rule were to apply
toallonline(andnot only to broadcast-related)media services,the
EBU feels thatit would bedesirable, with a view to safeguard
this principle,to accompany anadapted form of the injection
rule, a rulethat is based on the place of establishment, by
anti-location-shopping rules.17

 The Legal Study, p. 145, mentions that the criterion of
establishment is less easy to apply tonatural personsacting
without direct economic objectives. In those cases,his/her
"centre of activities" may be seen as the better criterion to
determine where the communication takes place. In the EBU view,
this criterion should also remain subject to the rules necessary
to prevent "location shopping".

(The EBU would be pleased tooffer technical input on a possible
legislative approach.)

(4) Other questions of the enquiry related to the "applicable
law/country-of-origin"

The EBU's favoured solution for theclarification of cross-border
communications as described above is far more suitable thanthe
introductionan EU Copyright Title(see Question 78), for the
following reasons:

the notion ofcountry-of-establishment is a conceptmost naturally
linked with the Single Market;several Directives with Internal
Market objectives use thisnotion, and the European Court in
thePremier Leaguecase showed (by allowing territorial
licencesto besubject tothe overriding principleof the freedom
of services) that the objectivesof copyright law may be
different, but they are not irreconcilable;

it leaves right holders'exclusive rights intact- subject to
other EU principles under competition law and the freedom of
services;

it solves thecross-border effect of exceptions and
limitations(see Questions26 and 27) in line with current,
common sense practice,and

it renders Question22 on"mandatory"limitations or exceptions
largelyobsolete, because the exceptions and limitations would
be applied in accordance with the national law only and thus
already havede factoEU-wide effect. Moreover, to make an
exception mandatory is likely to result in a more limited
interpretation.

Example:

A broadcaster intendsto transmit a documentary on a recently
deceased well-known actor, which includes a few clips from his
most notorious films. The clips were carefully edited so as to
meet the conditions for the exception for quotations under the
copyright law of the broadcaster's country of residence. The
documentary further includes music-synchronised footage that
was produced for the news report on the actor's death but which
was ultimately not broadcast. Highlights of the documentary are
also to be made available on the broadcaster's (publicly
accessible) website. If the broadcaster had to clear the rights
in accordance with the copyright laws in all countries where the
broadcast or website would be accessible, then the documentary
would have been of a lower quality (as either the clips
wouldprobably neverhave beenproduced orwould haveto be cut out,
and the non-broadcast footage could not have been used).

The same applies for a broadcaster's reliance on other
exceptions, as the criteria for these are not identical in
domestic legislations or areinterpreted differently bynational
courts.

B.Simultaneous retransmission of broadcasters'programmes on
non-cable platforms

The EBU proposes thatsimultaneous, unchanged and unabridged
retransmission of broadcastsoriginating in Member States should
follow the same licensing regime as is applied
totheretransmission of broadcasts viacable(Articles 9 and 10 of
the Sat-Cab Directive),irrespective of the retransmission
methodused.Inthecountriesmentioned abovewhere this is applied
under the national legislation(see under Question
2),ithasprovedto function without anyproblems.

(1) Legal background

The Sat-Cab Directive applies a "dual" (partly individual,
partly collective) licensing system for simultaneous, unchanged
and unabridged retransmission of broadcast programmes by cable
operators. The cable operatoris responsible for clearingthe
retransmission rights with the originating broadcaster,on the
one hand,and with the collecting societies for the remaining
rights (the"programme-underlying" rights such asthe producers
rights and those of the manyactors, singers,musicians,
scriptwriters,in each ofthe broadcasters programmes),on the
otherhand.For the latter, the Directiveintroduces mandatory
collective licensing for the rights to authorise cable
retransmission of works and other protected material integrated
into broadcast programmes, since individual licences from every
holder in each individual part of the programme
retransmittedwould be impossible to obtain.

Equally important is the fact that the Directive explicitly
exempts from mandatory collective management the exercise of
the rightsheld by broadcasting organisations to their
ownprogrammes(acquired rights and neighbouringrights), because
these rights can be obtainedindividuallyby cable operators
directly from the limited number of broadcasters whose
servicesit wishes to retransmit. This is markedly different
from the other rights embedded in the programmes whichare far
too numerous;so, it isreasonable that cable operators clear
theseunderlyingrightscollectively, via representative
collecting societies.

Whereas the Sat-Cab Directive deals only with the cross-border
situation, i.e. the licensing of retransmission rights with
respect toforeignbroadcasts, the same licensing system applies
in practice to cableretransmission of programmes at thenational
level in EU countries.

The European Court recently issued an important judgment on
broadcasters'contractual freedom to control the
retransmissionof their programmes by third parties. In theTV
Catchupcase, where an Internet operator provided "live
streaming" of various UK terrestrial and satellite broadcast
channels without authorisation, the Court decided that for the
simultaneous retransmission of broadcast programmes over the
Internet to be a communication to the public (under Article 3
of the InfoSocDirective), it is notnecessarythat the third
party's retransmission service beof aprofit-making nature or
competewith the original broadcast.18

 CJEU,ITV a.o. v. TVCatchup Ltd,Case C-607/11.

In other words, under EU law,Internet retransmissions of
broadcast programmes are subject to prior permission by all
holders of exclusive rights with respect to those programmes.Of
course, this does not exclude that, whilstthe rights held by the
broadcasting organisation itself (acquired rights and related
rights) remain exclusive,the national law can make theexercise
of the programme-underlying rightssubject to the same
collective licensing system thatappliesto cable retransmission
of programmes.

This specific rights clearance system for simultaneous, complete
and unchanged cable retransmission,asintroduced by the Sat-Cab
Directive, isa huge success. It promoted the availability of
European broadcasting services in all EU countries19

 Cable television is available in almost all European countries
apart from Greece and Italy which are satellite-dominated
markets. Cable television is still customarily supplied by
small, local companies, which explains why there are a large
number of cable operators in Europe. There exist, for instance,
more than 600 operators in Bulgaria, Poland and Romania.
(Source: European Audiovisual Observatory.)

by providing cable retransmission companieswith greater legal
security and facilitatedthe clearance of rights for their use.
It is an obvious example of a legislative measure creating a
single distribution market for broadcast programmes.In the
recitals of the Sat-Cab Directive, it is mentioned
thatsimultaneousretransmission via "microwave systems" would be
assimilatedto cable retransmission, which gives a clear
indicationthata technologically neutralapplication of the
licensing systemis possible.

In sum, the proposed solution would mean that the retransmission
rights held by the broadcasters themselves (i.e. their own
neighbouring rights and the rights they have acquired from
other right-holders) remain to be cleared by the platform
operator individually withthe broadcasters concerned, whereas
the retransmission rights in the contributions to the
programmes which are not held by the broadcasters are to be
cleared with the relevant collecting societies.

(2) Benefits for the Single Marketinadopting the proposed
solution

The Sat-Cab Directive pre-dates the development of similar
servicesby digital satellite bouquets or other new media. Cable
operators are no longer the only players on the broadcast
retransmission market. Digital satellite operators (as
illustrated by theAirfieldcase of the European Court)20

CJEUAirfield and Canal Digitaal v SabamandAirfield v Agicoa,
Joined cases C-431/09 and C-432/09.

and providers of DSL, IPTV and mobile telephone networks
andother digital platformsoperating according to exactly the
same business model(i.e. via subscription or registration which
is offered to domestic citizens only) are also active in this
market.The EBU solution would create alevel
playing-fieldbetween those operators andcableoperators, and
rights clearance for retransmission over other platforms than
cable (both for multiplatform use at the national level and
cross-border situations)would enjoy the same legal certainty as
cable operators.

This solution allows consumers to benefit from a wider offer of
broadcast services over a larger variety of platforms, whilst
promoting fair competition between platforms.Failing to
adoptthe proposed solution would lead tomarket distortions,
since cable operators can clear rightswith respect to
programmes more easilythan other operatorsof"closed"
subscription or registration-basedplatforms. Such a different
treatment cannot be justified from a competition law
perspective.

The reasoning behind thecable retransmission licensing system is
determined not by the technical characteristicsbut by
thecommercial natureof the retransmission activity made
available by the third-party operator (i.e. only topaying
subscribers- directly via subscription or indirectly through
added advertising). This was clarified by the European Court in
theAirfieldcase.

Making thecablelicensing system technologically neutralleavesall
right-holders involved in programme retransmissions over new
platforms, including those with exclusive retransmission
rights,in the same position as with respect to cable
retransmission.

In a recent report,21

Report of 28 January 2014), EPCommittee on Culture and
Educationon "Preparing for a Fully Converged Audiovisual
World(2013/2180(INI)), Nos.50-53.

the EPCommittee on Culture and Educationstressed the importance
of technology-neutral rights clearance systems in order
tofacilitatemedia servicesbeing made available on third-party
platforms and calls on the Commission "to enforce the principle
of technology neutrality consistentlyand, where appropriate, to
review European copyright law accordingly."

Equality of treatment, legal security and compliance with basic
copyright principleswouldjustify a technologically neutral
application of the specific system for obtaining cable
retransmission rights to similar cases of programme
retransmission over closed platforms.This would notably concern
broadband networks, mobile telephony and terrestrial or
satellite platforms ("bouquets"), provided that such
retransmission takes place simultaneously, completely and
without any modification and, in particular, provided that the
individual subscribers to the retransmission service are
clearly identifiable and that they are charged bythe
distribution platform operator (separately or through the
acceptance of advertising on the platform) for access toits
retransmission service.Thereby,suchother platform operators
would benefit from the same dual licensing regime for their
programme retransmission activities as cable operators.

C. Licensing of on-demand programmesof broadcastersto third
parties

The EBU believes that there are strong arguments for extending
thedescribed "dual" individual-collective licensing system for
the underlyingrights not onlyfor simultaneous (linear)
retransmission on other platforms but also to the use by
distribution platforms of broadcasters' on-demand offerswhich
areclearly related to their linear offer (the latter makes them
different from traditional, "stand-alone" video-on-demand
offers).An effective collective rights clearance system for the
underlyingrights would remedy the current situation.

Such requestfor effective rights clearance systemsis explicitly
made in the aforementioned Resolution of the European
Parliament on Connected TV.22

 2012/2300(INI), available
athttp://www.europarl.europa.eu/sides/getDoc.do?type=REPORT&reference=A7-2013-0212&language=EN.

An attractive solution on this particular issue can be provided
through the system of so-called "extended collective
licensing"(ECL), as recognised in Art. 9(2) of the Sat-Cab
Directive(andimplementedin several Member States). In such
cases the collective licensing of the underlying on-demand
programme rights (i.e. those not held by the broadcaster
itself) is not mandatory, but cleared via a voluntarily agreed
collective licensing scheme, with the exception of those
right-holderswho decide to "opt-out" from that
agreement.Thereby, the contractual freedom of all the
right-holders involved in the (on-demand) re-use of the
broadcasters' programmes is not affected.

For all clarity, this would mean that the retransmission and
on-demand rights held by the broadcaster itself would need to
be cleared individually from the relevant broadcaster, as in
the situation of cable retransmission, while the retransmission
and on-demand rights in the other right-holders' contributions
to the programmes and which are not held by the broadcaster are
to be cleared with the relevant collecting societies.

It is of crucial importance that with the opt-out possibility of
the ECL system, the principle of contractual freedom remains
intact and individual right-holderscan freely decidewhether or
not to opt-out, and when they do opt-out, to decide on whatever
licence to their content they may wish to engage in.In Member
States where theECL system has been applied for several
decades, it appearsthatopt-outs hardly everoccur, which
demonstrates the system's success.For example, in the Nordic
countries where this licensing system is available,itallowedthe
development of subscription-based online services which provide
both linear and non-linear (e.g. catch-up) access to programmes
frombothdomestic and foreign broadcasters.

It must be noted that this solution requires that the ECL is
indeed available in the copyright law of the Member State which
prefersto apply this system.The EU framework shouldtherefore
foster that availability.This is not the same as an "EU-wide
ECL", as its application would be limited to national licensing
situations. However, similar as the ECLsolutionfor satellite
broadcasting under Art. 9(2) of the Sat-Cab Directivein
combination with the satellite rule, the licensing
processwouldresultin providing consumers of domestic
subscription services with on-demand access toboth national
andforeign broadcasters' programmes, and thereby have
cross-border effect.

Given that the ECL system allows for opt-outs by
non-representedright-holders, it must be stressed that there is
no (legal) guarantee that it will function to the full
satisfactionof all parties concerned; in particular, anopt-out
may result in a "black-out" of a certain production which could
deprivethe other right-holders in thatproduction fromthe
expected revenue. To avoidthis risk, it should be possible
forthoseMember Stateswhich do not avail of the ECL system in
their law,to apply amandatorycollectivelicensing system
(i.e.for theunderlyingrights) as exists forthesimultaneouscable
retransmissionof foreign channels (see B above), instead of the
ECL.

Alternatively, some EBU Membersfeelthat such a mandatory
collective licensing system for the underlying rights shouldbe
possibleat leastforbroadcasters'catch-upservices,because those
services involve exactly the same programmes as previously
broadcast. In that case, in order to stimulate local access to
foreign on-demand programme services, the EU framework should
allowMember States to opt forsuchmandatory licensingsystem(for
the underlying rights)to be put in place intheir national law.

D.Advantages of the EBU proposalsfor promoting "portability" of
media content

The concept ofcross-border portability(i.e.a citizen accessing
his/her usual subscription while temporarily in another Member
State for work or holiday) must be distinguished from general
cross-border access to services offered by foreign operators
(i.e.a citizen being able to use from his/her home in a Member
State certain services offered in another Member State, on an
ongoing basis).Demand for such portability is clearly
increasing. However, if such portabilityweresubject to a strict
territoriality principle, it would unnecessarily complicate the
rights clearance process.

Media subscription servicesprovided by third parties, for
example by digital cable, IPTV or other mobile, telecom
orbroadband operators, ofteninclude broadcasters' programmes as
well.The subscription operator may wish to offer its
customers(general)portable accessto its services, and perhaps
even include such accessin a cross-border (or
rather"temporarytake-along") context.The average subscriber
paying for media content to be delivered to his portable device
would reasonably expect this content to be accessible from any
location where that particular device could be used by him
(viaan Internet connection). The act of retransmission or
making available of a broadcast programme by athird-party
subscription operator takes place in accordance with the
copyright law of the Member Statein which therelevant
communicationis made. In the case of subscription services this
is normally the country where the subscription is actually
offered to consumers.

If cross-border portable access to one's own media subscription
was made subject to the law of each country where the
particular subscriberhappens to be travelling,this would
requirethe subscription service operator to clear all rights
separately for each potential country (worldwide) that any
subscriber might wish to visit. Obviously, this would make it
impossible for the subscription operator to offer such services
in a legitimate way.Therefore, in order to avoidthat a
subscriber, who is temporarily in a foreign country,
isprevented from accessing its own subscription,there should
not be another (copyright relevant) communication.

However,the situation is differentforsubscription services
thatincludeportable (andpermanent)access toforeignbroadcasters'
services.That situation would be similar to the domestic cable
distribution of foreign channels. Consequently,forallowing
asubscription operator to offerforeignprogrammes(also)on
portable devices, permission from theforeignbroadcaster alone
would not be sufficient, becausethesubscriptionoperator would
also need the clearance of all the other rights in the
programmes (i.e. those that are not held by the broadcaster).As
explained above, in the current EU framework, therights
clearance for thoseunderlying rightsis facilitated only with
respect tosimultaneousretransmission of programmes bycable,but
not for other uses of broadcast programmes by third-party
platforms. Consequently, in order to foster portable
subscription services (including access to programmes from EU
broadcasters of other Member States) throughout the EU, the EBU
proposed solutions for the clearance ofthose
underlyingrights(see above under B and C)should be taken up.

6. Are there reasons why, even in cases where you have acquired
all the necessary rights for all the territories in question,
you would still find it necessary or justified to impose
territorial restrictions on the service recipient (in order for
instance, to redirect the consumer to a different website than
the one he is trying to access)?

Yes, see below and alsothe repliestoQuestions 2 and 4.

In the same way that the satellite injection rule functionsin
the Sat-Cab Directive, thecontractual freedom between media
service providers and content right-holders needs to be
maintained, subjectto European competition rulesand the freedom
of services.

The proposed extension of the satellite rule to EU-based online
media services should allow contractual freedom between media
service providers and right-holders (such as film producers) to
continue, because it should remain possible for media providers,
if they so wish, to obtain rights for services with a more
limited territorial reach. This may simply be theresult of
economic considerationsby the licensing parties concerned.

In accordance with EU law and principles,includingthe freedom
ofmedia services within the EU, the continuation of this
contractual flexibilityincludingwhen applied to online media
servicesis particularly important forbroadcasters and
right-holders,as itprovides asubstantial advantagefor finding
adequate licensing solutions,while underpinning the financing
of content production, over a more strictterritoriality
principle.

7.Do you think that further measures (legislative or
non-legislative, including market-led solutions) are needed at
EU level to increase the cross-border availability of content
services in the Single Market, while ensuring an adequate level
of protection for right holders?

Yes, protection of broadcasters'content and signal
integrityrequires further measures.

In itsreply to the EU Green Paperon
Convergence(andInternet-connectedTV), the EBU raised theneed
toprotect the signal and content integrity against commercial
overlays and other parasitic business models across platformsso
as to safeguard the European audiovisual production value chain.

For the media, but also for citizens, it is fundamental to
ensure that the audiovisual content delivered to the final
customer is identical to the content which is made available
under the media service provider's editorial responsibility.
Therefore, contentand signalintegrity must be safeguarded
against any modification to the quality, format or display of
the signal. In other words, no intermediary or third party
should be allowed to interfere with the content or signal,
without the authorisation of the media service provider in
question.

This isnot only a media law issue, butalso a copyright concern
in the sensethat under the current EU copyrightframework,
broadcasters do not have any such protection, whereas
protection under unfair competition laws would be unsuitable
(as these laws have not been harmonised EU-wide) and
insufficient (as these "rights" are not exclusive).

The most suitable solutionistheextension ofthe broadcaster's
neighbouring rightto protect its signals, on whatever platform,
against unauthorised alteration or other use by third parties.

Today, broadcasters already provide various signals across
multiple platforms.These signals are mainlylinear or on-demand
transmissions, but some could also be real-time streams,
similar to other types of simulcasts (e.g. "red-button
services"). Apart from regular(linear) broadcasts, other
examplesare the following:

simulcasts of regular broadcasts

catch-up of regular broadcasts

pre-transmission of regular broadcasts (pre-broadcast signals)

online signals including parts of regular broadcasts, either as
highlights or previews;

online extensions of regular broadcasts (e.g. a football match
or an Olympic Games' event taking place in parallel with the
live broadcast of another match or Games' event, or news
footage that was too long for use in the news programme);

signals with other related programming (e.g. interviews or
additional documentary material, supplementing a regular
programme), but which is not broadcast in a linear manner, and

signals with other online-only material.

This multi-platform use of broadcasters' services, which
simplyderivesfromtoday'saudiences' demands, explains that the
legal protection ofbroadcasters' signal and content integrity
against commercial overlays by third parties and other
parasitic business models across platforms has become an
important and urgent issue of media convergence. Content and
signal integrity needs to be ensured not only for (primary) TV
screens,but also for the"red-button"serviceswhich are made
visible via the same screen and forsecond screens, which are
synchronised with the TV picture.

This protection is important,in all Member States,for the
credibility and reputation of the media service provider, for
the trust which individual users place in particular media
services, and ultimately for the freedom of information of
citizens and the protection of the rights of others.Therefore,
this concern appliesnot only in the context of
"Internet-connected TV's", butto all situations where third
party platform operatorscould interfere with abroadcaster's
signal,includingin a cross-bordercontext.

8. Is the scope of the"making available"right in cross-border
situations -i.e. when contentis disseminated across borders
-sufficiently clear?

No, see abovethe repliestoQuestions 2, 4 and 6.

9. Could a clarification of the territorial scope of the"making
available"right have an effect on the recognition of your
rights (e.g. whether you are considered to be an author or not,
whether you are considered to have transferred your rights or
not), on your remuneration, or on the enforcement of rights
(including the availability of injunctive relief)?

Yes, see below and also the repliestoQuestions 2, 4 and 6.

For the reasons set out above in the reply to Questions, 2, 4
and 6, EBU Members strongly support the need for a
clarification of theactofcommunication as part ofthe"making
available"right in line with the satellite injection
rule,resulting in a country-of-establishment concept.

The main concern of the "targeting" approach which the
Commission mentions in relation to Questions 8 and 9 on the
making available-right - and which is also analysed by the
Legal Study - is thatit does not provide EU-based media
services with the necessary legal certaintyand it complicates,
rather than facilitates,the rights clearance process.

Which criteriawill determinewhether a territory has been
"targeted"? For example, if an on-demand media service is
offered in the English, German or Swedish language, what would
be the conclusion as to theintended audiences?The mere fact
that some Member States sharea common language (oftenonly
partly) cannot be sufficient to conclude on targeting both
territories.And what about targeting mainly the domestic
audience and a very small minority of another country, e.g.
ex-patriates? Atwhich percentage (ofthe total population of a
country) would the targeted audience become legally relevant,
and which authority should be entitled to determine that
percentage? Also, what would be the effect of legal
disclaimerson the relevant websites?These are just a few
examples of themanypossible uncertaintieswhich could all be
made subject to lengthy court proceedings. This means that the
targeting approachhas substantial disadvantagesfor creating an
unhindered flow of European media services.23

 Variations of the targeting approach are the "exploitation"
approach and the concept of the "most closely connected"
country which is used in private international law ("conflicts
of law"). However, they bear the same disadvantages - according
to the legal Study, op.cit., p. 181, "the exploitation approach
does not solve the bottlenecks found in the current state of
the law with regard to the licensing process for cross-border
transactions".

For the avoidance of doubt, the EBU doesnot exclude applying the
targeting approach (by default) tonon-EU basedonline service
providers, as these are not subject to any obligations
oranti-circumventionsafeguards under the EU media
regulation.Similarly, as explained above, an adaptedversionof
the satelliteinjection approach resulting in a
country-of-establishment ruledoes not exclude takingaccount of
targeting elementsas a corrective factorfor determining fair
remuneration.

10. Does the application of two rights to a single act of
economic exploitation in the online environment (e.g. a
download) create problems for you?

Yes. The separate exercise of the reproduction right for an
activity that is subordinate to the main act of communication
raises a conflict with the authorisation for the main act.

The reproduction right is a different and,in principle,separate
right from any act of communication to the public. However,it
becomes problematicif this right can be
exercisedindependentlyfrom the communication right involved
andwithrespect toforms of exploitationwhich are economically
one and the same. In such casesthere is a risk ofdiscrepancy
between theconditionsthat were set (or have been agreed) for
the two rights concernedandthatofdouble paymentfor the same
use.Sucharisk exists especially if therights are in different
hands.Separateexercise can thereby frustrate the economic
activity for which permissionhad beenobtained.

Examples:

In a case before the Munich courts (MyVideo Broadband vs.
CELAS), the judges held that, in general, the making available
of copyright protected works online required both the making
available right and the reproduction right, because an
on-demand use was technically not feasible without a
reproduction. German copyright law did not allow a splitting of
making available rights and reproduction rights for online uses.
As a consequence, the music publisher could not have validly
transferred only mechanical reproduction rights for online uses
to CELAS while the making available rights were still managed by
GEMA.

In some Member States, independent production companies that are
commissioned by a broadcaster to produce TV programmes are
required to obtain, for the use of music in such
productions,not onlylicences for synchronisation/reproduction
rights from a collecting society, but also so-called master
rights from a recordcompany,despite the fact that the
broadcaster already has an agreement with thelocal collecting
society for the communication to the public of the same music
used in the TV programmes in question.

In the EBU view, in caseswhere the reproduction right isonlyofan
ancillary naturetowards the main
economic(communication)activitywhich requires authorisation,
the right should generally be subject to a "normative
interpretation". This means that in cases where the
authorisation (by licence or by law) purports to allow oneand
the same economic activity,such as broadcasting or on-demand
use,it should be subject to only one right (and one licence),
andanyreproduction that is merely necessary to prepare the core
activity should not have a separate or independent nature.

This is also the case where authorisation for the communication
act would be provided bylaw (possibly subject to remuneration):
If the right-holder wereentitled to an equitable remuneration
for a certain type of usage, then asserting the exclusive
reproduction right over that particular use that was already
authorised would seem to be exercising a right beyond the
so-called "specific subject matter" of copyright.

Thisnormative interpretationwould not abolish or devalue the
reproduction right as such. Even where the rights are in
different hands, it would merely force therelevant
right-holder(s)to agree amongthemselveson their respective
sharesfrom the communication licence fee.

The EBU position issharedby academic research24

 See the Lisbon Council Policy Brief of 30 May2013, by Prof.
Hargreaves andProf. Hugenholtz,
athttp://gallery.mailchimp.com/e11b949d8350120e252700029/files/LisbonCouncil_policybrief_FIN2_web.pdf:"Given
that the right of making available was especially tailored to
serve as the primary economic right involved in acts of digital
transmission, it would make sense for the scope of the right of
reproduction to be reduced."

and,to a certain extent,by the European Court'sPremier
Leaguedecision (that allowed a broaderapplication of Art.
5(1)InfoSocDirective).At the same time, this position provides
an answer to another question, namelyQuestion12(no separate
"web-page viewing" right).

11. Should the provision of a hyperlink leading to a work or
other subject matter protected under copyright, either in
general or under specific circumstances, be subject to the
authorisation of the right-holder?

The EBU has taken note of the recent judgment by the European
Court in theSvenssoncase that a mere hyperlink is not a
communication to the public under Article 3(1) of the 2001
Copyright (InfoSoc) Directive. As this
judgmentrefersexclusivelytohyperlinksto predominantly
text-based online publications, and not any other types of
communications, the EBU welcomes theoutcomeof the decision.

The EBU also welcomes the Court's reasoning that, where a
hyperlink is used to provide unauthorized access to content
which is behind an access control mechanism (including e.g. a
pay-wall), then such hyperlink would amount to acircumvention
ofatechnological meansof protectionby communicating
thesaidcontent to a public that was not originally authorized
toaccess it.This example clarifies that, regarding this
question No. 11, there maywell becircumstances under which the
provision of a hyperlink leading to a work or other subject
matter protected under copyright should be subject to the
authorisation of the right-holder.

Moreover, with respect toother types of communications, the EBU
feels that there is a crucial distinction to be made.This
follows onfrom the Court's decision in theTVCatchupcase, where
the type of communication clearly involved aneconomic form of
exploitation.

This view is based on the fact that Article 3(1) InfoSoc
Directive implements Article 8 of the 1996 WIPO Copyright
Treaty (WCT), together with the Agreed Statement, intoEU law.
The Agreed Statement (which is reflected in Recital 27 of the
InfoSoc Directive) clarifies that economic forms of
exploitation, different from the mere provision of physical
facilities,should fall under the scope of communications that
are relevant under Art. 8 WCT, and thus under Art. 3(1)
InfoSocDirective. This is in linewith the copyright principle
thatrightholders shouldbe able to receive an equitable share of
the proceeds arising from the economic exploitation of their
works or other protected subject matter.

Consequently, Internet-based communications that differ
from"mere"hyperlinks as in theSvenssoncase itself should not
fall outside the scope of Art. 3 InfoSoc Directive,whether or
notthere is a "new public". For example, neither Art. 8 WCT nor
Articles 11, 11bisand 11terof the Berne Convention, to which
Art. 8 WCT refers, require a "new public" as adecisive
conditionfor the application of those provisions. Thisalso
explainsthe Court's decision in theTVCatchupcase where the
question of a "new public" was not heldasrelevant.

The EBU feels that the matter ofembeddingorframing(in particular
of audio or video streams provided by another website) is
markedly different from mere hyperlinking.Forms of economic
exploitationwhich have similar characteristics should be
treatedastechnologically neutral (as set out elsewhere in the
EBU reply), and thus differently from mere hyperlinking as in
theSvenssoncase. Therefore, regarding such other types of
communications, the EBU should like to reserve its
position,pendingthe forthcoming judgment intheBestwatercase.

12. Should the viewing of a web-page where this implies the
temporary reproduction of a work or other subject matter
protected under copyright on the screen and in the cache memory
of the user’s computer, either in general or under specific
circumstances, be subject to the authorisation of the
rightholder?

No. See the reply toQuestion 10.

19. What should be the role of the EU in promoting the adoption
of identifiers in the content sector, and in promoting the
development and interoperability of rights ownership and
permissions databases?

There should be nomandatoryuse of identifiers.

The EBU is opposed to amandatoryimplementation of standard
identifiers. EBU Members have expressed the desire for freedom
to decide whether or not to use such identifiers.

While the EBU agrees that the use of audiovisual work
identifiers can be helpful in the process of rights clearance,
distribution for online availability, and discoverability of
European works,the EBU and Members have expressed concerns with
respect to the need for interoperability between existing
identifiersto be implementedand the fact that evaluations of
the costs and benefits of existing identifiers need to be
undertaken. Therefore,PSM should remain free to decide whether
or not to adopt a givenidentifier.In addition, a market-led
approach to identifiers is more suitable as it canbe an
incentive toinnovation.

20. Are the current terms of copyright protection still
appropriate in the digital environment?

No. The 2011 Term Extension Directive remains
aninappropriatemeasure. Also, there should be no further
increase in the terms of protection.

The EBU stands by its highly critical assessment of the Term
Extension Directive: extending the term of protection of the
exclusive right of phonogram producers stifles innovation and
hinders legal online offers.25

 Seehttp://www3.ebu.ch/files/live/sites/ebu/files/Knowledge/Publication%20Library/Position%20Papers/EBU-Position-EN_Extending%20Term%20Protection%2024.11.2008.pdf)

The EBU would oppose any further extension in scope (e.g.to
performers and producers in the audiovisual sector, cf. Article
3.2of the Directive).

22. Should some/all of the exceptions be made mandatory and, if
so, is there a need for a higher level of harmonisation of such
exceptions?

No.By clarifying the act of making available in accordance with
the satellite injection rule,exceptions and limitations would
havede factocross-border effect, and thus there is no need to
make any of them mandatory.See the repliestoQuestions 2 and
4above.

24. Independently from the questions above, is there a need to
provide for a greater degree of flexibility in the EU
regulatory framework for limitations and exceptions?

EBU Members in variousMember States feel that serious thought
should be given to adaptingexistingexceptions or
limitationsunder their applicable national lawwhere such need
for more flexibility would exist with respect tospecificcases.
However, EBU Members in other countries are of the view that
concerning the exceptions or limitationsunder the lawin their
territory no such needfor more flexibilityexisted.

Examples:

Regarding the following exceptions or limitations,EBU Membersin
variousMember States have raised the needfor more flexibility
as to their scope of applicationunder their national law:

"Ephemeral reproductions":SomeEBU Members find that
thenationalexceptionimplemented underArt. 5(2)(d) of the
Infosoc Directive shouldclearlyalso cover broadcasters' online
or on-demand services, as currently it is unclear whether this
clause can apply to those services, eventhough the wording is
not limited to broadcastingper se. The rationale for this
provision is exactly the same for all broadcasters' services,as
it is intended to exempt activities of only a preparatory
naturefrom the need for a separate licensing arrangement.

Quotations:SomeEBU Members find thatthe national exception
implemented underArt 5(3)(d) of the Infosoc Directive,
concerningquotations for purposes such as criticism or
reviewneeds to be clarified so that quotations can also apply
to the digital environment. If a photo or paintings etc. cannot
be used in a critical presentation in digital form, such as a
broadcaster's internet news service (while it would be
permitted to be used in analogue newspapers), in the digital
age this restriction has negative effects on the possibilities
to report on topics of general interest in a democratic
society.

Educational use:SomeEBU Members find that the conditions of
theirnationalexception for educational use should be clarified,
as they are currently too vague, which hinders EBU Members in
licensing their own content for non-commercial use in domestic
and other Member States' schools.

25.If yes, what would be the best approach to provide for
flexibility? (e.g. interpretation by national courts and the
ECJ, periodic revisions of the directives, interpretations by
the Commission, built-in flexibility, e.g. in the form of a
fair-use or fair dealing provision / open norm, etc.)? Please
explain indicating what would be the relative advantages and
disadvantages of such an approach as well as its possible
effects on the functioning of the Internal Market.

Generally, EBU Members do not favour the creation of an US-like
"fair use" clause, as such an open-ended clause would arguably
cause too much legal uncertainty.

On the other hand, compared to the situation in2001, the
analogue world is in the process of being bypassed by the
digital environment. Therefore, for those Member States where
EBU Members have expressed the need for more flexibility, a
general solution for the above could be provided by a
certainclarification,or where necessary, amodificationof the
InfoSoc Directive,tosupportthose individual Member Stateswhere
the aforementioned need existsto updateat least some of
theirnationalexceptions and limitationswith respect to the
online world.

However,for the sake of clarity,in countries where EBU Members
have expressed the view thatadded flexibility is not needed,
suchclarification ormodification should allow those Member
States to maintain thestatus quounder their law.

41. Would it be necessary to develop mechanisms, beyond those
already agreed for other types of content (e.g. for audio-or
audio-visual collections, broadcasters’ archives)?

Yes, a special mechanism forthe specific issue
ofpublicbroadcasters' archivesneeds to exist in each Member
State.

PSM wishing to make their archive productions available online
face a huge administrative burden due toissues with the process
ofrights clearance.These archives have been built up by
broadcasters over several decades for the purposeof
producingaudio and audiovisual programmes within their public
service remit. To reduce the administrative burden for making
those archives available online, alegislative solution is
needed at the national level.26

During theLicences for Europestakeholder dialogue, the EBU and
its Members have repeatedly stressed the need for a solution
for its specific archive problem in the Audiovisual-Heritage
Working Group, see in particular the presentationon14 June
2013, entitled "Unlocking Public Service Broadcasters'
Archives",
seehttp://ec.europa.eu/licences-for-europe-dialogue/en/content/wg3-presentations-5th-meeting-14-june.

In order to take account of national (individual or collective)
licensing practices, at the EU level,aframeworkprovision would
be sufficientto promote the adoption of such national
solutions. Furthermore, this solution isneededonlyin countries
where it does not already exist. Thisapproachis fully compliant
with the principle of subsidiarity.

While the need for a solutionto the PSM's archive problem is
generally recognised,any solutionwouldneed to reduce the
administrative burdenfor PSMand to allow them to open up their
archives to online uses.This does not mean that there should be
aone-size-fits-alllegislative solution.Specific legal
provisionson the re-use of broadcasters' archives already
existin various countries. Member States should be able to
provide appropriate solutions taking into account the
characteristics ofnational copyright practices. Any solution
should recognise thespecificitiesof PSMarchives (large amount
and complexity of rights),shouldapply tothe full variety of
contentin PSMarchives andshouldcoverany type of re-use,
including excerpts.

Collective licensing solutions are particularly suitable for the
large scale clearance of rights whereverindividual licensing
would not be feasible or would be disproportionate considering
the massive number of rightholders involved.Solutions based
on"extended collective licensing"have proven to be very useful
in unlocking archives. The EU shouldfoster legal provision in
national laws- in accordance withnational legal mechanisms and
collective licensing traditions - that enablesECLto be used for
finding appropriate national solutions.

53(a): Have you experienced obstacles, linked to copyright, when
trying to use text or data mining methods, including across
borders?

Yes, there is legal uncertainty as to which typesof use(of text
and data)would be subject to prior authorisation from the right
holder.

54: If there are problems, how would they best be solved?

This issue affects public service broadcasters indirectly as
journalists and researchers working for broadcasters explore
vast amounts of existing texts and data, in orderto obtain new
insights, patterns and trends which information will then be
broadcast.

Copyright should not be an obstacle for such use. This can be
solved at least partly through a recalibration of the
reproduction right (seeQuestion 10above), asin the context of
text and data mining it should be clarifiedalsothat
meretemporary copiesare not subject to the reproduction right.

58(a):Have you experienced problems when trying to use
pre-existing works or other subject matter to disseminate new
content on the Internet, including across borders?

58(c):Have you experienced problems resulting from the way the
users are using pre-existing works or other subject-matter to
disseminate new content on the Internet, including across
borders?

61: If there are problems, how would they best be solved?

Yes, public service broadcasters have experience with UGC both
asusersforcontent shared by their audiences as well asright
holderswhen others have re-used their productions for UGC. The
challenge in both cases is how to assess whether the actual use
is covered by an exception, and if not, how the necessary rights
can be cleared.

Itis difficult to give a clear definition of UGC, as it covers
many different types of media and creative works, increasingthe
risk of abuse or unintended consequences. It may be helpful at
least to distinguish two categories of UGC:

(1) works created entirely by users (not using pre-existing
copyright protected material); and

(2) works created by users from pre-existing works.

With regard to the first category, many of these UGC works will
be protected by copyright. When broadcasters are users of such
UGC content, they will ensure, via their "terms of use", that
the person sharing the UGChas giventhe necessary
authorisations.

The Commission is focusing on the second category of UGC, i.e.
based on pre-existing protected material. Copyright issues will
arise when such UGC is based - in part or in full - on others'
works without authorisation, be it for commercial or
non-commercial purposes, and where the use does not fall within
an exception and limitation. Most relevant exceptions are those
for quotations or criticism, comments, parody, news reporting,
researchor educationalactivities. As with any other use of a
protected work, if no exception can be invoked, the UGC"maker"
must obtainpermissionfrom the right-holders to create and
distribute the UGC.

The EBU sees no urgent needat present for a legislative change
through the introduction ofan exception specifically
targetingUGC.Proposals forthe introduction ofa new, general
exceptionforso-called "transformative use"seem to beexcessive
andcould easily lead toabuse.

The Commission shouldtake into accountthe whole value chain in
considering this issue, i.e. there are not only end-users and
rights holders, but also commercial websites that benefit
financially from hosting UGC (whether or not there is
revenue-sharing with the UGC creator). Also, special licensing
solutions are being developed to address UGC using pre-existing
worksbetween the rights holders and hosting websites, which also
simplifies the situation for end-users.

64. In your view, is there a need to clarify at the EU level the
scope and application of the private copying and reprography
exceptions in the digital environment?

Yes.The EBU would welcome a clarification that the exception was
not intended to cover commercial copying on behalf of
individuals.See also the proposal to protect content and signal
integrity underQuestion 7above.

The following remarks need tobe read together with theoverall
concern regarding new technologies or the appearance of new
devices which are used to exploit broadcasters' programming in
ways that run counter to the broadcasters' (and other programme
right-holders') legitimate interests.

The questionnaire itself refers to an "on-going discussion as to
the application or not ofleviesto certain types of cloud-based
services such as personal lockers or personal video recorders".
The levy system is not the main concern for broadcasters.

PSM supportsthe possibility for individual members of the public
to make private recordings of free-to-view broadcasts for their
own personal use.This should also allowfor copying of contentby
an individualpersonto another medium or device (also owned by
that individual) for his/her own personal use.However,
thisprivate useis markedly different from the situation where
an increasing number of telecom, IPTV or Internet operators
offer a service, against payment(usually a combination of
advertisements and monthly fees),which allows subscribers to
"record" a television broadcast and watch the recording of the
broadcast at their convenience (including use of the pause and
fast-forward functions). The copy of the broadcast is
notlocated in the subscriber's own TV set or but is onlyon the
operator's server (or its outsourced "cloud" servers) oron
thehard-drive of theset-top box controlled by the operator. The
operators offering these services claim that the functionality
they offer is covered by the exception for private copying
(Art.5.2(b)of the 2001 InfoSocDirective).

The operator present their services as if they aremere
"technical facilitator".However, there is no doubt that by
giving subscribers access tocopiesof the broadcaster's
programmesstored on their server, areproductionis made.
Moreover, the reproduction is made on behalf of the consumer in
return fordirect or indirectpayment.Given increasing storage
capacity, such services can record whole channels or genres
based on a programme that the consumer has previously selected
to record, and store these for an unlimited period. It
therefore becomes a parallel on-demand service,indirectconflict
withbroadcasters’ catch-up services made available
totheiraudiences,butwithout a licensing agreement.Asthis
seriously undermines the continued investment
inoriginalbroadcastproductions, it is essential that the
private copying exception does notallow
suchcommercialpractices.

Owing to the technical complexity, courts are struggling with
the correct legal qualification of these services. For a better
understanding of how the system works, courts often revert to
analogies, e.g. with photocopying shops, photocopiers in
libraries or the video recorder which existed before the advent
of the Internet.However, it should not be possible for
commercial operators to rely on this exception, because it
isclearlyaimed at reproductions madeby a natural personfor
private use and for ends that areneither directly or indirectly
commercial.

Whilebroadcasters currently face problems with service providers
offering cloud-based or similarly automaticmass-recording
solutions, the issue should be addressed in a
technology-neutral manner:Anymisuse for commercial purposes of
the exception should always be prohibited, irrespective of the
technology used. Future technical developments should not allow
third parties' parasitic exploitation for clear commercial
purposes to fall under this exception.Operators wishing to
legally offer such a service can easily seek the prior
authorisation from the broadcasters concerned, via appropriate
licensing tools.

75. Should the civil enforcement system in the EU be rendered
more efficient for infringements of copyright committed with a
commercial purpose?

76. In particular, is the current legal framework clear enough
to allow for sufficient involvement of intermediaries (such as
Internet service providers, advertising brokers, payment
service providers, domain name registrars, etc.) in inhibiting
online copyright infringements with a commercial purpose? If
not, what measures would be useful to foster the cooperation of
intermediaries?

Yes,a particular focuson infringements with a commercial
purposeis needed.

The EBU would like to refer to its response to a number of key
questions in the EU consultation on civil enforcement of IPR:
public consultation on the efficiency of proceedings and
accessibility of measures(March 2013)27

 TheEBU responseisavailable here:

http://www3.ebu.ch/files/live/sites/ebu/files/Knowledge/Publication%20Library/Position%20Papers/EBU-Position-EN%20reply%20to%20consultation%2023.3.2013.pdf

as well as its response to the consultation on procedures for
notifying and acting on illegal content hosted by online
intermediaries (September 2012).28

 TheEBU responseis available here

http://www3.ebu.ch/files/live/sites/ebu/files/Knowledge/Publication%20Library/Position%20Papers/EBU-Position-EN_Consultation%20on%20NA%20Procedures%20-%20EBU%20Response.pdf.

The EBU agrees that it would be useful to establish, attheEU
level, model rules for fast track proceedings for civil law
cases concerning infringements of IPRs, including community
trademarks and community designs. The same goes for specific
model rules for small claims proceedings for civil law cases
concerning infringements of IPRs, including community
trademarks and community designs.

In casesof commercial scale infringements or
notoriousinfringers, there should be particular consequences
(e.g. suspension of the infringer's/alleged infringer's
account) resulting from a notification mechanism.

The availability of effective notice and take-down mechanisms is
of crucial importance for public service broadcasters.The EBU
finds that notice and action procedures currently lack the
necessary level of effectiveness. Different hosting service
providers use different systems of notification of illegal
content. This creates a variety of procedures to be fulfilled
to protect content on these services.

78. Should the EU pursue the establishment of a single EU
Copyright Title, as a means of establishing a consistent
framework for rights and exceptions to copyright across the EU,
as well as a single framework for enforcement?

No, seebelow andthe repliestoQuestions 2, 4 and 6above.

The rights clearance model that the EBU proposes for EU-based
media services (or at least for broadcasters' online
broadcast-related services), based on an adapted version of the
satellite injection rule,isthe least intrusive solutionto a
practical issue, and is therefore infinitely preferable to a
complete overhaul of EU copyright law, as would be required by
the abolishing of territoriality in the EU or the introduction
of a new EU "Copyright Title".

For enforcement, however, thoughts should be givenastohow a
decision in a given Member State on theinfringement of an IP
right can takeinto accountthedamages(from the same
infringement) thatmayhave occurred in other Member
States.Guidance givenso far by the European Court of Justice in
thePinckneycase29

CJEU Case C‑170/12 -Peter Pinckney v KDG Mediatech AG, 3 October
2013.

on how to interpret the Brussels I regulation is unhelpful as it
suggests that the damages will only relate to the harm created
in that particular Member State.A less ambiguous rule on the
competence of courts to assess the full extent of the
damages(wherever occurred)would be welcomed.

____________________

Annexe

