


Public Consultation

on the review of the EU copyright rules

Contents

I.  Introduction  2

A.  Context of the consultation  2

B.  How to submit replies to this questionnaire  3

C.  Confidentiality  3

II.  Rights and the functioning of the Single Market  6

A.  Why is it not possible to access many online content
services from anywhere in Europe?  6

[The territorial scope of the rights involved in digital
transmissions and the segmentation of the market through
licensing agreements]  6

B.  Is there a need for more clarity as regards the scope of
what needs to be authorised (or not) in digital transmissions?
8

[The definition of the rights involved in digital transmissions]
8

The act of “making available”  9

Two rights involved in a single act of exploitation  10

Linking and browsing  11

Download to own digital content  12

C.  Registration of works and other subject matter – is it a
goodidea?  13

D.  How to improve the use and interoperability of identifiers
14

E.  Term of protection – is it appropriate?  14

III.  Limitations and exceptions in the Single Market  15

F.  Access to content in libraries and archives  19

Preservation and archiving  20

Off-premises access to library collections  21

E – lending  22

Mass digitisation  24

G.  Teaching  25

H.  Research  27

I.  Disabilities  28

E Text and data mining  30

F User-generated content  32

IV Private copying and reprography  34

V Fair remuneration of authors and performers  38

VI Respect for rights  40

VII A single EU Copyright Title  42

VIII Other issues  42

Introduction

Context of the consultation

Over the last two decades, digital technology and the Internet
have reshaped the ways in which content is created,
distributed, and accessed. New opportunities have materialised
for those that create and produce content (e.g. a film, a
novel, a song),for new and existingdistribution platforms,for
institutions such as libraries, for activities such as research
and for citizens who now expect to be able to access content –
for information, education or entertainment purposes –
regardless of geographical borders.

This new environment also presents challenges.One of themis for
the market to continue to adapt to new forms of distribution
and use.Another oneis for the legislator to ensure that the
system of rights, limitations to rights and enforcement remains
appropriate and is adapted to the new environment. This
consultation focuses on the second of these challenges:
ensuring that the EU copyright regulatory frameworkstays fit
for purpose in the digital environmentto support creation and
innovation, tap the full potential of the Single
Market,fostergrowth andinvestment in our economy
andpromotecultural diversity.

In its"Communication on Content in the Digital Single Market"the
Commission set out two parallel tracks of action:ontheone hand,
to complete its on-going effort to review and to modernise the
EU copyright legislative frameworkwith a view to a decision in
2014 on whether to table legislative reform proposals, andon
the other, to facilitate practical industry-led solutions
through the stakeholder dialogue"Licences for Europe"on issues
on which rapid progress was deemed necessary and possible.

The"Licences for Europe"process has been finalised now. The
Commission welcomes the practical solutions stakeholders have
put forward in thiscontext and will monitor their progress.
Pledges have been made by stakeholders in all four Working
Groups (cross border portability of services, user-generated
content,audiovisual andfilm heritage and text and data mining).
Taken together, the Commission expects these pledgesto bea
further step in making the user environment easier in many
different situations. The Commission also takes note of the
fact that two groups –user-generated content andtext and data
mining–did not reach consensus among participating stakeholders
on either the problems to be addressed or on the results.
Thediscussions andresults of"Licences for Europe"will be also
taken into account in the context of the review of the
legislative framework.

As part of thereview process, the Commission is now launching a
public consultation onissuesidentified in the Communication on
Content in the Digital Single Market, i.e.:"territoriality in
the Internal Market, harmonisation, limitations and exceptions
to copyright in the digital age; fragmentation of the EU
copyright market; and how to improve the effectiveness and
efficiency of enforcement while underpinning its legitimacy in
the wider context of copyright reform". As highlighted in the
October 2013 European Council Conclusions"Providingdigital
services and content across the single market requires the
establishment of a copyright regime for the digital age. The
Commission will therefore complete its on-going review of the
EU copyright framework in spring 2014. It is important to
modernise Europe's copyright regime and facilitate licensing,
while ensuring a high level protection of intellectual property
rights and taking into account cultural diversity".

This consultation builds on previous consultations and public
hearings, in particular those on the"Green Paper on copyright
in the knowledge economy", the"Green Paper on the online
distribution of audiovisual works"and"Content Online". These
consultations providedvaluable feedback from stakeholders on a
number of questions,on issues as diverse as the territoriality
of copyright and possible ways to overcome territoriality,
exceptions related to the online dissemination of knowledge,
and rightholders’ remuneration, particularly in the audiovisual
sector. Views were expressed by stakeholders representing all
stages in the value chain, including right holders,
distributors, consumers, and academics. The questions elicited
widely diverging views on the best way to proceed. The "Green
Paper on Copyright in the Knowledge Economy" was followed up by
a Communication. The replies to the "Green Paper on the online
distribution of audiovisual works" have fed into subsequent
discussions on the Collective Rights Management Directive and
into the current review process.

How to submit replies to this questionnaire

You are kindly asked to send your repliesby5 March2014inaMS
Word, PDForOpenDocumentformattothefollowinge-mail address of DG
Internal Market and
Services:markt-copyright-consultation@ec.europa.eu. Please note
that replies sentafterthat date will not be taken into account.

This consultation is addressed to different categories of
stakeholders. To the extent possible, the questions indicate
the category/ies of respondents most likely to be concerned by
them (annotation in brackets, before the actual question).
Respondents should nevertheless feel free to reply to any/all
of the questions. Also, please note that, apart from the
question concerning the identification of the respondent, none
of the questions is obligatory. Replies containing answers only
to part of the questions will be also accepted.

You are requested toprovideyour answers directlywithin
thisconsultation document. For the“Yes/No/No
opinion”questionsplease put the selected answer
inboldandunderlineit so it is easy for us to see your
selection.

In your answers to the questions, you are invited to refer to
the situation in EUMember States.You are also invited in
particular to indicate, where relevant, what would be the
impact of options you put forward in terms of costs,
opportunities and revenues.

The public consultation is available in English.
Responsesmay,however,be sent in any of the 24officiallanguages
of the EU.

Confidentiality

The contributions received in this round of consultation as well
as asummary reportpresenting theresponsesin a statistical and
aggregated formwill be published on the website of DG MARKT.

Please note that all contributions received will be published
together with the identity of the contributor, unless the
contributor objects to the publication of their personal data
on the grounds that such publication would harm his or her
legitimate interests. In this case, the contribution will be
published in anonymous form upon the contributor's explicit
request. Otherwise the contribution will not be published nor
will its content be reflected in the summary report.

Pleaseread ourPrivacy statement.

Please identify yourself:

Name:

SOCIETE DES EDITEURS ET AUTEURS DE MUSIQUE
(SEAM)…………………………………………………………………………………………La
SEAMest la société civile de perception et de répartition pour
la reprographie de musique (photocopies de musique
imprimée)agréée par le Ministère de la Cultureet pour
certains droits numériques (copie privée,numérique à
l'Éducation nationale,base de paroles de chansons…) de la
musique graphique.

Elle est aussi l’agence française de l’ISMN (International
Standard Music Number ou Numéro international normalisé de la
musique).

Elle représente les ayants droit (auteurs, compositeurs et
éditeurs) de la musique imprimée : partitions de musique,
méthodes pédagogiques instrumentales ou formation musicale,
paroles de chansons, songbooks, etc..Elle représente tous les
types de musique : musique classique, de variété, jazz, etc..

…………………………………………………………………………………………………..

In the interests of transparency, organisations (including, for
example, NGOs, trade associations and commercial enterprises)
are invited to provide the public with relevant information
about themselves by registering in the Interest Representative
Register and subscribing to its Code of Conduct.

If you are a Registered organisation, please indicate your
Register ID number below. Your contribution will then be
considered as representing the views of your organisation.

27749741273748…………………………………………………………………………………………………..

…………………………………………………………………………………………………..

If your organisation is not registered, you have the opportunity
toregister now.Responses from organisations not registered will
be published separately.

If you would like to submit your reply on an anonymous basis
please indicate it belowby underlining the following answer:

Yes, I would like to submit my reply on an anonymous basis

Type of respondent(Pleaseunderlinethe appropriate):

End user/consumer(e.g.internet user,reader, subscriber to
musicor audiovisualservice, researcher,student)ORRepresentative
of end users/consumers

for the purposes of this questionnaire normally referred to
in questions as"end users/consumers"

Institutional user(e.g. school,university, research centre,
library, archive)ORRepresentative of institutional users

for the purposes of this questionnaire normally referred to
in questions as"institutional users"

Author/Performer OR Representative of authors/performers

XPublisher/Producer/BroadcasterOR Representative of
publishers/producers/broadcasters

the two above categoriesare,for the purposes of this
questionnaire, normally referred to in questions as"right
holders

Intermediary/Distributor/Other service provider(e.g. online
music or audiovisual service, games platform,social media,
search engine, ICT industry)OR Representative of
intermediaries/distributors/other service providers

for the purposes of this questionnaire normally referred to
in questionsas"service providers"

Collective Management Organisation

Public authority

Member State

Other(Please explain):

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Rights and the functioning of the Single Market

Why is it not possible to accessmany online content servicesfrom
anywhere in Europe?[The territorial scope of the rights involved
in digital transmissions and the segmentation of the market
through licensing agreements]

ensuring an adequate level of protection for right holders.

[In particular if you are an end user/consumer:]Have you faced
problems whentryingto access online services in an EU Member
State other than the one in which you live?

YES - Please provide examples indicating the Member State,
the sector and the type of content concerned (e.g. premium
content such as certain films and TV series, audio-visual
content in general, music, e-books, magazines, journals and
newspapers, games, applications and other software)

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO

NO OPINION

[In particular if you area service provider:]Have you faced
problems when seeking to provide online services across
bordersin the EU?

YES - Please explain whether such problems, in your
experience, are related to copyright or to other issues (e.g.
business decisions relating to the cost of providing services
across borders, compliance with other laws such as consumer
protection)? Please provide examples indicating the Member
State, the sector and the type of content concerned (e.g.
premium content such as certain films and TV series,
audio-visual content in general, music, e-books, magazines,
journals and newspapers, games, applications and other
software).

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO

NO OPINION

[In particular if you area right holder or acollective
management organisation:]Howoftenare youaskedtogrant
multi-territorial licences?Pleaseindicate, if possible, the
number of requests per yearand provide examples indicating the
Member State, the sector and the type of content concerned.

[Openquestion)

Les ayants droit de musique ont confié à la Sacem la gestion
collective de l’exploitation sonore de leurs œuvres.
Elleaccorde ainsi des licences d’exploitation sous la forme de
licences multi territoriales et nous lui laissons donc le soin
de répondre aux questions posées.

Concernant les œuvres musicales graphiques, il s’agit
principalement pour le moment de gestion individuelle
concernant les licences multi territoriales (que ce soit pour
le karaoké ou les partitions de musique etc..).

Par ailleurs, la Seamgère depuis quelques années une base de
données de paroles de chansons intitulée BOEM (Base d’œuvres de
l’Edition Musicale).Cette base est une réponse aux besoins
d’offre légale d’accès aux textes de chansons et est proposée
pour une exploitation « business to business » en ce sens que
les œuvres ne sont pas mis à la disposition des internautes
directement depuis notre site mais mis à la disposition
d’exploitants de sites internet ou d’opérateurs de téléphonie
mobile qui passent contrat avec la SEAM pour accéder à la base
de données.

La base de données totalise plus de 40 000 titres (titres
français et anglo-saxons). Chaque éditeur membre de la Seam a
le choix d’inclure ses paroles de chansons dans la base et de
confier à la Seam la gestion de celles-ci. La répartition des
sommes collectées est répartie « titre à titre » grâce à la
mise en place d’un outil informatique adapté permettant de
prendre en compte les utilisations (« clics ») des œuvres
concernées.

If you have identified problems in the answers to any of the
questions above – what would be the best way to tackle them?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

[In particular if you area right holder or acollective
management organisation:]Are there reasons why, even in cases
where you hold all the necessary rights for all the territories
in question, you would still find it necessary or justified to
impose territorial restrictions on a service provider (in
order, for instance, to ensure that access to certain content
is not possible in certain European countries)?

x YES– Please explain by giving examples

Il peut s’avérer en effet nécessaire d imposer des restrictions
territoriales à un fournisseur de services quand le contrat
liant l’éditeur à l’auteur ne couvre pas tous les
territoirespar exemple. Toutefois la situation la plus
fréquente provient plutôt des services en ligne eux-mêmes qui
pour s’adapter aux marchés nationaux restreignent les accès aux
différents pays. Enfin cette question est inhérente à la
Directive qui vient d’être votée par le Parlement Européen sur
la gestion collective et les licences pour l’utilisation des
œuvres musicales en ligne.

Comme nous le dirons à plusieurs reprises lors de ce
questionnaire, le principal frein à une Europe harmonieuse et
harmoniséeest le piratage des œuvres et le manque de solutions
apportées voire les entraves des autorités européennes
elles-mêmes(cf plus tard problème de l’irresponsabilité des
intermédiaires techniques consacrée dans la DirectiveCommerce
électronique de 2000).Revenir sur ces points est le seul
espoir de rentabilité des modèles économiques sur le web.

NO

NO OPINION

[In particular if you aree.g. a broadcasteror a service
provider:]Are there reasons why, even in cases where you have
acquired all the necessary rights for all the territories in
question, you would still find it necessary or justified to
impose territorial restrictions on the service recipient (in
order for instance, to redirect the consumer to a different
website than the one he is trying to access)?

 YES – Please explain by giving examples

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO

 NO OPINION

Do you think that further measures (legislative or
non-legislative, including market-led solutions) are needed at
EU level to increase the cross-border availability of content
services in the Single Market, while ensuring an adequate level
ofprotection for right holders?

 YES – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

xNO– Please explain

cf réponses précédentes………………………………

NO OPINION

Is there a need for more clarity as regards the scope of what
needs to be authorised (or not) in digital transmissions?[The
definition of the rights involved in digital transmissions]

The EU framework for the protection of copyright and related
rights in the digital environment is largely established by
Directive 2001/29/EC1

Directive 2001/29/EC of the European Parliament and of the
Council of 22 May 2001 on the harmonisation of certain aspects
of copyright and related rights in the information society.

on the harmonisation of certain aspects of copyright and related
rights in the information society. OtherEUdirectives in this
field that are relevant in the online environment are those
relating to the protection of software2

Directive 2009/24/EC of the European Parliament and of the
Council of 23 April 2009 on the legal protection of computer
programs.

and databases3

Directive 96/9/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council
of 11 March 1996 on the legal protection of databases.

.

Directive 2001/29/ECharmonisestherights of authors and
neighbouring rightholders4

Film and record producers, performers and broadcasters are
holders of so-called “neighbouring rights” in, respectively,
their films, records, performances and broadcast. Authors’
content protected by copyright is referred to as a “work” or
“works”, while content protected by neighbouring rights is
referred to as “other subject matter”.

which are essential for thetransmission of digital copiesof
works(e.g. an e-book)and other protected subject matter(e.g. a
record in a MP3 format)over the internet or similar digital
networks.

The mostrelevantrightsfor digital transmissionsarethe
reproduction right, i.e. the right to authorise or prohibit the
making of copies5

The right to “authorise or prohibit direct or indirect,
temporary or permanent reproduction by any means and in any
form, in whole or in part” (see Art. 2 of Directive 2001/29/EC)
although temporary acts of reproduction of a transient or
incidental nature are, under certain conditions, excluded (see
art. 5(1) of Directive 2001/29/EC).

,(notablyrelevant at the start of the transmission –e.g. the
uploading ofadigital copy of a work to a serverin view ofmaking
it available–and at the users’ end– e.g. when a user downloads
a digital copy of a work)and the communication to the
public/making available right, i.e. the rights to authorise or
prohibit the dissemination of the works in digital networks6

The right to authorise or prohibit any communication to the
public by wire or wireless means and to authorise or prohibit
the making available to the public “on demand” (seeArt. 3 of
Directive 2001/29/EC).

.These rightsare intrinsically linked in digital
transmissionsandboth need to be cleared.

The act of “making available”

Directive 2001/29/EC specifiesneitherwhatis covered bythe making
available right(e.g. the upload,the accessibility by the
public,theactualreception by the public)norwherethe act of
“making available” takes place. This does not raise questions
if the act is limited to a single territory. Questions arise
however when the transmission covers several territories and
rights need to be cleared (does the act of "making available"
happen in the country of the upload only? in each of the
countries where the content is potentially accessible? in each
of the countries where thecontent is effectively accessed?).The
most recent case law of the Court of Justice of the European
Union (CJEU)suggests that a relevant criterion is
the“targeting” of a certainMember State'spublic7

See in particularCase C-173/11(Football Dataco vs Sportradar)
andCase C-5/11 (Donner) for copyright and related rights, and
Case C-324/09 (L’Oréal vs eBay) for trademarks. With regard to
jurisdiction seealso joined Cases C-585/08 and C-144/09 (Pammer
and Hotel Alpenhof)andpending CaseC-441/13 (Pez Hejduk);
seehowever,adopting a different approach, CaseC-170/12
(Pinckney vs KDG Mediatech).

. According to this approachthecopyright-relevant act(which has
to be licensed) occurs at leastin those countries which are
“targeted” by the online service provider.A service provider
“targets” a group of customers residing in a specific country
when it directs its activity to that group, e.g. via
advertisement, promotions,a language or a currency specifically
targeted at that group.

Is the scope of the “making available” right in cross-border
situations – i.e. when content is disseminated across borders –
sufficiently clear?

 YES

 NO – Please explain how this could be clarified and what
type of clarification would be required (e.g. as in "targeting"
approach explained above, as in "country of origin" approach8

The objective of implementing a “country of origin”approachis to
localise the copyright relevant act that must be licenced in a
single Member State (the "country of origin", which could be
for example the Member State in whichthe content is uploaded or
wherethe service provider is established), regardless of in how
many Member States the work canbe accessed or received. Such an
approachhas already been introduced at EU level with regard to
broadcasting by satellite(seeDirective 93/83/EEC on the
coordination of certain rules concerning copyright and rights
related to copyright applicable to satellite broadcasting and
cable retransmission).

)

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO OPINION

[In particular if you are a right holder:]Could a clarification
of the territorial scope of the “making available” right have
an effect on the recognition of your rights (e.g. whether you
are considered to be an author or not, whether you are
considered to have transferred your rights or not), on your
remuneration, or on the enforcement of rights (including the
availability of injunctive relief9

Injunctive relief is a temporary or permanent remedy allowing
the right holder to stop or prevent an infringement of his/her
right.

)?

 YES – Please explain how such potential effects could be
addressed

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO

 NO OPINION

Two rights involved in a single act of exploitation

Each act of transmission in digital networks entails(in the
current state of technology and law) several reproductions.This
means that there are two rights that apply to digital
transmissions: the reproduction right and the making available
right. Thismay complicate the licensing of works for online
usenotably whenthetwo rights are held by different
persons/entities.

[In particular if youa service provider or a right holder:]Does
the application of two rights to a single act of economic
exploitation in the online environment (e.g. a download) create
problems for you?

YES – Please explainwhat type of measureswould be needed in
order to address such problems (e.g. facilitation of joint
licences when the rights are in different hands,legislation to
achieve the "bundling of rights")

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

XNOCe problème ne se pose pas dans la mesure où le droit de
reproduction et le droit de mise à disposition ne sont pas
détenus par des entités différentes. Ils sont cédés dans un
même contratde cessionet ensuite concédés dans une même
licence d’exploitation.

NO OPINION

Linking and browsing

Hyperlinks are references to data that lead a user from one
location in the Internet to another. They are indispensable for
the functioning of the Internet as a network. Several cases are
pending before the CJEU10

Cases C-466/12 (Svensson), C-348/13 (Bestwater International)
and C-279/13 (C More entertainment).

in which the question has been raised whether the provision of
a clickable link constitutes an act of communication to the
public/making available to the public subject to the
authorisation of therightholders.

A user browsing the internet (e.g. viewing a web-page) regularly
creates temporary copies of works and other subject-matter
protected under copyright on the screen and in the 'cache'
memory of his computer. A question has been referred to the
CJEU11

Case C-360/13 (Public Relations Consultants Association Ltd).See
alsohttp://www.supremecourt.gov.uk/decided-cases/docs/UKSC_2011_0202_PressSummary.pdf.

as to whether such copies are always covered by the mandatory
exception for temporary acts of reproduction provided for in
Article 5(1) of Directive 2001/29/EC.

Should the provision of a hyperlink leading to a work or other
subject matter protected under copyright,either in generalor
under specific circumstances,besubject to the authorisation of
the rightholder?

X YES– Please explain whether you consider this to be the case
in general, or under specificcircumstances, and why

Tout depend des circonstances.S’il s’agit de la simple
fourniture d’un hyperlien menant à une copie autorisée d’une
oeuvre, l’autorisation préalable de l’ayantdroitpourrait
nepasêtrenécessaireétant donné qu’alors la licence
s’appliquera(référencement) et que l’ayant droit donnera
autorisation.Toutefois, un lien hypertexte doit-il être
considéré commeune donnée stockéeou commerenvoyant seulement
vers des données stockées ? La notion de donnée est large et il
semble que le lien hypertexte est une donnée en soi, qui permet
d’accéder à d’autres donnéeset qu’il peut s’agir d’une nouvelle
exploitation de l’œuvre donnant ainsi lieu à autorisation.
Cfavis du Comité exécutif du 16septembre 2013 de l’ALAI
(Association Littéraire et Artistique Internationale). Le
problème se pose aussi de façon évidente pour les images fixes
quand le lien hypertexte permet de reproduire l’œuvre elle-même.

Par ailleurs,si le lien permet une mise à disposition d’œuvres
présentes sur des sitesillégaux, les moteurs de recherche
devraient pouvoir être considérés comme des contrefacteurs ou
des receleurs.Le problème se pose avec encore plus d’acuité
dans le cas de sites agrégateurs recensantdes liens hypertextes
renvoyant à des contenus illicites (notamment films, musique,
etc..).On retrouve ici la difficulté d’interprétation du
critère de « connaissance des données stockées » dégagé par la
CJUE afin de qualifierla responsabilité d’un prestataire
-hébergeur.Or d’après la Directive Commerce électronique de
2000 l’irresponsabilité de l’intermédiaire technique est
consacrée et c’est à l’ayant droit de surveiller le web et
notifier chaque renvoi à un contenu illicite, tâche sans fin
puisque les liens réapparaissent aussitôt après suppression.

 NO – Please explainwhether you consider this to be the case
in general,or under specific circumstances, and why(e.g.
because it does not amount to an act of communication to the
public – or to a new public, or because it should be covered by
a copyright exception)

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO OPINION

Should the viewing of a web-page where this implies the
temporary reproduction of a work or other subject matter
protected under copyright on the screen and in the cache memory
of the user’s computer, either in general or under specific
circumstances, be subject to the authorisation of the
rightholder?

X YES – Please explain whether you consider this to be the case
in general, or under specific circumstances, and why

Là encore, la réponse dépend des circonstances.Endroit
françaisl’article L 122-5 6° prévoit une exception pour la
reproduction provisoire présentantun caractère transitoire ou
accessoire.Toutefois cette reproduction provisoire ne doit
pasavoir de valeur économique propre. S’il y a valeur
économique, il doit y avoir autorisation des ayants droit.

 NO – Please explain whether you consider this to be the case
in general, or under specific circumstances, and why (e.g.
because it is or should be covered by a copyright exception)

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

 NO OPINION

Download to own digital content

Digital content is increasinglybeing boughtvia
digitaltransmission(e.g. download to own). Questions arise as
to the possibility forusersto dispose of the filesthey buy in
this manner(e.g. by selling themor by giving them as a gift).
The principle of EU exhaustion of the distribution right
applies in the case of the distribution ofphysical copies (e.g.
when a tangible article such as a CD or a book, etc. is sold,
the right holder cannot prevent the further distribution of
that tangible article)12

See also recital 28 of Directive 2001/29/EC.

. The issue that arises here is whether this principle can also
be applied in the case of an act of transmission equivalent in
its effect to distribution (i.e. where the buyer acquires the
property of the copy)13

In Case C-128/11 (Oracle vs. UsedSoft) the CJEU ruled that an
author cannot oppose the resale of a second-hand licence that
allows downloading his computer program from his website and
using it for an unlimited period of time. The exclusive right
of distribution of a copy of a computer program covered by such
a licence is exhausted on its first sale.While it is thus
admitted that the distribution right may be subject to
exhaustion in case of computer programs offered for download
with the right holder’s consent, the Court was careful to
emphasise that it reached this decision based on the Computer
Programs Directive. It was stressed that this exhaustion rule
constituted alex specialisin relation to the Information
Society Directive (UsedSoft, par. 51, 56).

. This raises difficult questions, notably relating to the
practical application of such an approach (how to
avoidre-sellers keepingand usinga copy ofawork afterthey have
“re-sold” it – this is often referred to as the “forward and
delete” question) as well as to theeconomic implications of the
creation of a second-hand market of copies of perfect quality
that never deteriorate (in contrast to the second-hand market
for physical goods).

[In particular if you arean end user/consumer:]Haveyou
facedrestrictions when trying to reselldigital files that you
havepurchased (e.g.mp3 file,e-book)?

 YES – Please explain by giving examples

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO

NO OPINION

[In particular if you area right holder or a service provider:]
What would bethe consequencesof providing a legal framework
enabling the resale of previously purchased digital content?
Please specify per market (type of content) concerned.

[Open question]

L’épuisement des droits ne peut pas s’appliquer aux services en
ligne et aux biens immatériels En effet, la directive du
Parlement Européen et du Conseil du 22 mai 2001 est très
explicite sur ce point : tout service en ligne constitue un
acte devant être soumis à autorisation. Sans cela, cela
conduirait à tuer le marché naissant des contenus numériques et
à décourager toute initiative dans ce domaine.

Registration of works and other subject matter – is it a
goodidea?

Registration is not often discussed in copyright in the EU as
the existing international treaties in the area prohibit
formalities as a condition for theprotection and
exerciseofrights. However,this prohibition is not absolute14

For example, it does not affect “domestic” works – i.e.works
originating inthe country imposing the formalitiesas opposed to
works originating inanothercountry.

.Moreover a system of registration does not need to be made
compulsory or constitute a precondition for the protection and
exercise of rights.With a longer term of protection and with
the increased opportunities that digital technology
providesfortheuse of content(includingolder works and works
that otherwise wouldnot havebeen disseminated),the advantages
and disadvantages of a system of registrationare increasingly
being considered15

On the basis of Article 3.6 of the Directive 2012/28/EU of the
European Parliament and of the Council of 25 October 2012 on
certain permitted uses of orphan works, a publicly accessible
online database is currently being set up by the Office
forHarmonisation of theInternalMarket (OHIM)for the
registration of orphan works.

.

Would the creation of a registration system at EU level help in
the identification and licensing of works and other subject
matter?

YES

XNO

Des systèmes sont déjà prévus comme l’ISMN (International
Standard Musical Number) pour la musique imprimée, au niveau
national le registre des livres indisponibles du 20èmesiècle
(loi du 1ermars 2012) permettant l’information des titulaires
de droits et des utilisateurs, le système ARROW(Accessible
Registries of Rights Information and Orphan Works towards
Europeana)mis en place par l’UE, ou encore la base de données
GRD (Global Repertoire Database) en cours d’élaborationdans le
secteur musical. La création d’un nouveau système
d’enregistrementeuropéen rendra encore plus complexele
système existant.

NO OPINION

What would bethe possible advantagesof such a system?

[Open question]

Aucun (système réponse précédente)

What would bethe possible disadvantagesof such a system?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

What incentives forregistrationbyrightholderscould be envisaged?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

How to improve theuse andinteroperability ofidentifiers

There are many private databases of works and other subject
matter held by producers, collective management organisations,
and institutions such as libraries, which are based to
a greater or lesser extent on the use of (more or less)
interoperable, internationally agreed ‘identifiers’.
Identifiers can be compared to a reference number embedded in a
work, are specific to the sector in which they have been
developed16

E.g. the International Standard Recording Code (ISRC) is used to
identify recordings, the International Standard Book Number
(ISBN) is used to identify books.

, and identify, variously, the work itself, the owner or the
contributor to a work or other subject matter. There are
notable examples of where industry is undertaking actions to
improve the interoperability of such identifiers and databases.
The Global Repertoire Database17

You will find more information about this initiative on the
following website:http://www.globalrepertoiredatabase.com/.

should, once operational, provide a single source of information
on the ownership and control of musical works worldwide. The
Linked Content Coalition18

You will find more information about this initiative(funded in
part by the European Commission)on the following website:
www.linkedcontentcoalition.org.

was established to develop building blocks for the expression
and management of rights and licensing across all content and
media types. It includes the development of a Rights Reference
Model (RRM) – a comprehensive data model for all types of
rights in all types of content. The UK Copyright Hub19

You will find more information about this initiative on the
following website:http://www.copyrighthub.co.uk/.

is seeking to take such identification systems a step further,
and to create a linked platform, enabling automated licensing
across different sectors.

What should be the role of the EU in promoting the adoption
of identifiers in the content sector, and in promoting the
development and interoperability of rights ownership and
permissions databases?

[Open question]

Des standards d’identification (ISWC, IPI, codes ISMNetc..)
existent déjà. Lacréationde nouveaux identifiants rendrait
encore plus complexe le système existant.

Term of protection – is it appropriate?

Works and other subject matter are protected under copyright for
a limited period of time. After the term of protection has
expired, a work falls into the public domain and can be freely
used by anyone (in accordance with the applicable national
rules on moral rights). The BerneConvention20

Berne Convention for the Protection of Literary and Artistic
Works,http://www.wipo.int/treaties/en/ip/berne/.

requires a minimum term of protection of 50 years after the
death of the author. The EU rules extend this term of
protection to 70 years after the death of the author (as do
many other countries, e.g. the US).

With regard to performers in the music sector and phonogram
producers, the term provided for in the EU rules also extend 20
years beyond what is mandated in international agreements,
providing for a term of protection of 70 years after the first
publication. Performers and producers in the audio-visual
sector, however, do not benefit from such an extended term of
protection.

Are the current terms of copyright protection still appropriate
in the digital environment?

XYES – Please explain

La durée actuelle du droit d’auteur est adaptée au monde
numérique et il n’y a pas lieu de la limiter. En effet, la
durée de retour sur investissement est la même que l’œuvre
soit exploitée de façon traditionnelle ou numériquesurtout dans
le marché naissant du numérique. La tentation est grande bien
sûr pour certains de défendre un domaine public précoce soit
pour des raisons politiques ou purement financières
d’appropriation. Il serait très dangereux de se plier à ces
tendances. De plus il ne serait pas praticable pour la gestion
collective des droits que la durée de protection soit plus
courte pour les exploitations numériques, tous les modes
d’exploitations étant liés.

NO – Please explain if they should be longer or shorter

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO OPINION

Limitations and exceptions in the Single Market

Limitations and exceptions to copyright and related rights
enable the use of works and other protected subject-matter,
without obtaining authorisation from the rightholders, for
certain purposes and to a certain extent (for instance the use
for illustration purposes of an extract from a novel by a
teacher in a literature class). At EU level theyare established
in a number of copyright directives, most notably
Directive2001/29/EC21

Plus Directive 96/9/ECon the legal protection of
databases;Directive 2009/24/ECon the legal protection of
computer programs,and Directive 92/100/ECon rental right and
lending right.

.

Exceptions and limitations in the national and EU copyright laws
have to respect international law22

Article 9(2) of the Berne Convention for the Protection of
Literary and Artistic Works (1971); Article 13 of the TRIPS
Agreement (Trade Related Intellectual Property Rights) 1994;
Article 16(2) of the WIPO Performers and Phonograms Treaty
(1996); Article 9(2) of the WIPO Copyright Treaty (1996).

. In accordance with international obligations, the EU acquis
requires that limitations and exceptions can only be applied in
certain special cases which do not conflict with a normal
exploitation of the work or other subject matter and do not
unreasonably prejudice the legitimate interest of the
rightholders.

Whereas thecatalogueof limitations and exceptions included
inEUlawis exhaustive(no other exceptions can be applied to the
rights harmonised at EU level)23

Other than the grandfathering of the exceptions of minor
importance for analogue uses existing in Member States at the
time of adoption ofDirective 2001/29/EC(see, Art. 5(3)(o)).

, these limitations and exceptions areoftenoptional24

With the exception ofcertain limitations: (i)in the Computer
Programs Directive,(ii) in the Database Directive,(iii) Article
5(1) in theDirective 2001/29/ECand(iv) the OrphanWorksDirective.

,in the sense thatMember Statesare free to reflect in national
legislation as many or as few of them as they wish.Moreover,the
formulation of certain of the limitations andexceptionsis
general enough to give significantflexibility totheMember
States as to how,and to what extent,toimplement them (if they
decide to do so). Finally,it is worth noting that not all of
the limitationsand exceptionsincluded in the EUlegal framework
for copyrightare of equivalent significance in policy terms and
in terms of their potential effect on the functioning of the
Single Market.

Inaddition, inthe same manner that the definition of the rights
is territorial (i.e. has an effect only within the territory of
the Member State), the definition of the limitations and
exceptions to the rights is territorial too (so an act that is
covered by an exception in a Member State "A" may still require
the authorisation of the rightholder once we move to the Member
State "B")25

Only theexception established in therecent Orphan Works
Directive(a mandatory exceptionto copyright and related rights
in the case where the rightholders are not known or cannot be
located) has been givena cross-border effect, which means that,
for instance, once a literary work – for instance a novel – is
considered an orphan work in a Member State, that same
novelshall be considered an orphan work in all Member Statesand
can beused and accessed in all Member States.

.

The cross-bordereffectoflimitations andexceptionsalsoraises the
question of fair compensation of rightholders.In some
instances,Member States are obliged to compensate rightholders
for theharm inflicted on them bya limitation orexceptionto
their rights. In other instancesMember Statesare not obliged,
butmay decide,to provide for such compensation.If a limitation
or exception triggering a mechanism of fair compensation were
to be given cross-border effect (e.g. the books are used for
illustration in an online course given by an university in
a Member State "A" and the students are in a Member State "B")
then there would also be a need to clarifywhich national law
shoulddeterminethe level of that compensation and who should
pay it.

Finally, the question of flexibility and adaptability is being
raised: what is the best mechanism to ensure that the EU and
Member States’ regulatory frameworks adapt when necessary
(either to clarify that certain uses are covered by an
exception or to confirm that for certain uses the authorisation
of rightholders is required)? The main question here is whether
a greater degree of flexibility can be introduced in the EU and
Member States regulatory framework while ensuring the required
legal certainty, including for the functioning of the Single
Market, and respecting the EU's international obligations.

Are there problems arising from the fact that most limitations
and exceptions provided in the EUcopyright directivesare
optionalfor the Member States?

YES – Please explain by referring to specific cases

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

XNO–Please explain

Une exception au droit d’auteur n’est et ne sera jamais une
solution satisfaisante, l’exception s’accompagnant en général
d’une simple « compensation » voire de la gratuité. Une
exception affaiblit le droit des ayants droitmême si dans
certains cas l’exception peut s’avérer un instrument
nécessaire. Chaque pays a ses spécificités et sa propre
politique culturelle qu’il convient de préserver.Marché unique
ne veut pas dire marché uniforme.

Il est donc primordial que les exceptions puissent au moins
rester optionnelles étant donné leur multiplicité par
ailleurs.L’harmonisation des exceptions ira toujours dans un
sens de nivellement par le bas pour les pays protecteurs et
soucieux de leurs créateurs.Quand la directive de 2001 a dû
être incorporée dans notre législation nationale, certains
utilisateurs ont vu l’opportunité de rendre gratuit ce qui
auparavant faisait l’objet de redevances pour les créateurs des
œuvres. Multiplier encore le nombre de ces exceptions ou les
rendre obligatoires conduirait à la mort de l’industrie
culturelle au détriment à long terme d’ailleurs de la
diversification de l’offre et donc au détriment des
utilisateurseux-mêmes.C’est une des raisons pour lesquelles
notre société de droits d’auteurmais aussi la France se sont
prononcéescontre laréouverture de la Directive 2001.

Une discussion de fond sur d’autres directives qui en sont
indissociables comme la Directive Commerce électronique de
2000est nécessaire. En effet, les vraies barrières à la
création d’un marché européen des contenusnumériques ne
proviennent pas de niveaux de protection différents selon les
pays mais plutôt du piratage des œuvres, empêchant le
développement des offres légales et leur rentabilité.Or,cette
lutte doit passer irrévocablement par uneresponsabilisation des
intermédiairestechniques. Or, la Directive Commerce électronique
de 2000, directive transversale,consacre l’irresponsabilité de
ceux-ci s’ils ont un rôle passif. En effet, le considérant 42
de la Directive de 2000 énonce très clairement ce principe
d’irresponsabilité :« Les dérogations en matière de
responsabilité prévues par la présente directive ne couvrent
que les cas où l'activité du prestataire de services dans le
cadre de la société de l'information est limitée au processus
technique d'exploitation et de fourniture d'un accès à un
réseau de communication sur lequel les informations fournies
par des tiers sont transmises ou stockées temporairement, dans
le seul but d'améliorer l'efficacité de la transmission. Cette
activité revêt un caractère purement technique, automatique et
passif, qui implique que le prestataire de services de la
société de l'information n'a pas la connaissance ni le
contrôle des informations transmises ou stockées »).

Or, cela revient à« écoper un bateau qui coule avec une petite
cuillère »..L’ayant droitaura la charge de surveiller le web et
devra notifier chaque contenu illicite.Dansle meilleur des cas,
l’intermédiaire technique ou l’hébergeur
vaacceptersurnotificationde l’ayantdroit de supprimer le
contenu illicite qui sera de nouveau disponiblequelquesminutes
plus tard.Or, ces prestatairesne sont pas de simples
intermédiaires, il tirent profit de cette situation de non
droit et captent à leur profit la valeurproduite par ces mises
à disposition sans avoir à verser aucun droit et créent une
distorsion de concurrence envers le diffuseur traditionnel qui,
lui, ne se cache pas derrière le statut bien pratique
d’intermédiaire technique et verse des droits d’auteur aux
créateurs.

Il convient donc d’étudier en profondeur ces questions d’un
point de vu juridique et pragmatique pour faire cesser cette
illégalité omniprésente sur le net afinque le cadre contractuel
puisse s’exercer pleinement.

NO OPINION

Should some/all of the exceptions be made mandatory and, if so,
is there aneed for a higher level of harmonisation of such
exceptions?

YES–Please explain byreferringto specific cases

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

XNO – Please explain

.cf réponse précédente

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO OPINION

Should any newlimitations andexceptions be added toor removed
fromthe existing catalogue?Please explain by referring to
specific cases.

[Open question]

Non, de nouvelles exceptions risquent imanquablement d’affaiblir
encore plus les droits descréateurs.L’éventailproposéest déjà
très large et suffisantet il conviendrait plutôt de travailler
à ce que tout d’abord les exceptions soient strictement
encadrées et respectent véritablement le test destrois étapes
de la Convention de Berne sans servir en fait à pallier les
déficits publics comme dans le domaine de l’éducation par
exemple et qu’une meilleure défense européenne des droits des
auteurs soit organisée contre notamment le piratage(cf réponses
précédentes).

Independently from the questions above, is there a need to
provide for a greater degree of flexibility in the EU
regulatory framework for limitations and exceptions?

YES – Please explain why

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

XNO – Please explain why

Il semblerait en lisant la question 25 que d’avantage de
“flexibilité” pour la Commission signifie en fait une
permissivité encore plus large que celle existanteet donc un
affaiblissement des droits des créateursen consacrant des
notions telles que le “fair use” ou le “fair dealing”.Nous y
sommes totalement opposéspour les raisons exposées plus tôt.
Cela par ailleurs engendreraitune insécurité juridique
certaine.

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO OPINION

If yes, what would be the best approach to provide for
flexibility? (e.g.interpretation by national courts and the
ECJ, periodic revisions of the directives, interpretations by
the Commission, built-in flexibility, e.g. in the form of a
fair-useor fair dealingprovision / open norm, etc.)?Please
explain indicating what would be the relative advantages
anddisadvantages of such an approach as well as its possible
effects on the functioning of the Internal Market.

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Does the territoriality of limitations and exceptions, in your
experience,constitute a problem?

YES–Please explain why andspecify which exceptions you are
referring to

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

X NO – Please explain why and specify which exceptions you are
referringto

Laterritorialité des limitations et exceptions ne pose pas de
problème étant donné qu’en cas d’impact transfrontalier,la
jurisprudence communautaire permet une interprétation normative
et unifiée en cas de doute. Ainsi concernant par exemple la
compensation équitable prévue pour la copie privée un certain
nombre d’arrêts de la CJEU apporte des solutions unifiées
commedans l’arrêt Austro Mechana contre Amazon du 11 Juillet
2013 où la Courrappelle que la compensation équitable devait
être perçue dans l’Etat de résidence de l’utilisateur qui
cause le préjudice à l’auteur même si elle est mise à la charge
de personnesplacées à un niveau supérieur dans la chaîne de
distribution des supports par rapport aux particuliers en
l’espèce le distributeur domicilié dans un autre Etat
membre.

NO OPINION

In the event that limitationsand exceptionsestablished at
national level were to have cross-border effect, howshouldthe
question of “fair compensation” be addressed, whensuch
compensation is part of the exception? (e.g. who pays whom,
where?)

[Open question]

Cf réponse précédente.

Access to content in libraries and archives

Directive2001/29/EC enablesMember Statesto reflect in their
national law a rangeoflimitations andexceptions for the benefit
of publicly accessible libraries, educational establishments and
museums, as well as archives. If implemented, these
exceptionsallow acts of preservation and archiving26

Article 5(2)c of Directive 2001/29.

andenable on-site consultation oftheworks and other subject
matter in the collections of such institutions27

Article 5(3)nof Directive 2001/29.

. The public lending(under an exception or limitation)by these
establishments of physical copies of works and other subject
matter is governed by the Rental and Lending Directive28

Article 5 of Directive 2006/115/EC.

.

Questionsarise as to whetherthe current framework continues to
achieve the objectives envisaged or whether it needs to be
clarified or updated to cover use in digital networks. At the
same time, questions arise as to the effect of such a possible
expansion on the normal exploitation of works and other subject
matter and as to the prejudice this may cause to rightholders.
The role of licensing and possible framework agreements between
different stakeholders also needsto be considered here.

Preservationand archiving

The preservation of the copies of worksor othersubject-matter
held in the collections of cultural establishments (e.g. books,
records, or films)– the restoration or replacement of works, the
copying of fragile works -mayinvolvethe creation ofanother
copy/iesof these worksor othersubject matter. Most Member
States provide for an exception in their national laws allowing
for the making of such preservation copies.The scope of the
exceptiondiffersfrom Member State to Member State(as regardsthe
type of beneficiary establishments, the types of
works/subject-mattercovered by the exception, the mode of
copyingand the number of reproductions that a beneficiary
establishment may make).Also, the current legal status of new
types of preservation activities (e.g. harvesting and archiving
publicly available web content) is often uncertain.

(a)[In particular if you arean institutional user:]Have you
experienced specific problems when trying to use an exception
to preserve and archive specific works or other subject matter
in your collection?

(b)[In particular if you arearightholder:]Have you experienced
problems with the use by libraries, educational establishments,
museum or archives of the preservation exception?

YES – Please explain, by Member State, sector, and the type
of use in question.

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

XNO

La France a mis en place une exception pour la reproduction
d’une œuvre et sa représentation effectuées à des fins de
conservations ou destinées à préserver les conditions de sa
consultation à des fins de recherche ou d’études privées par
des particuliers dans les locaux de l’établissement ou sur des
terminaux dédiés par des bibliothèques accessibles au public,
par des musées ou par des services d’archives sous réserve que
ceux-ci ne recherchent aucun avantage économique ou commercial
(loi du 13 juin 2009 : article L1225-5 9° du Code de la
Propriété Intellectuelle).

La Bibliothèque nationale de France(BNF) aofficiellement pour
mission la numérisation à des fins de conservationdes œuvres.En
effet, le Code patrimoine a introduit une exception au bénéfice
desorganismes en charge du dépôt légalquisontdoncautorisés à
effectuer la reproduction sur tout support et par tout procédé
d'une œuvre, lorsque cette reproduction est nécessaire à la
collecte, à la conservation et à la consultation sur place. Ils
sont également autorisés à donner accès à l'œuvre sur place à
des chercheurs, dûment accrédités, sur des postes individuels
de consultation dont l'usage leur est exclusivement réservé.

Aussi le cadre existantest fécond et préservebien les
équilibres.

NO OPINION

If there are problems, how would they best be solved?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

If your view is that a legislative solution is needed, what
would be its main elements? Which activities of the beneficiary
institutions should be covered and under which conditions?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

If your view is thatadifferent solutionisneeded, what would it
be?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Off-premises access to library collections

Directive 2001/29/EC provides an exception forthe consultation
ofworks and other subject-matter(consulting an e-book, watching
a documentary) viadedicated terminals on the premises of such
establishmentsfor the purpose of research and private study.
The online consultation ofworks and other subject-matter
remotely(i.e. when the library user is not on the premises of
the library)requires authorisation andis generallyaddressed in
agreements between universities/libraries and publishers.Some
argue that the law rather than agreements should provide for
the possibility to, and the conditions for,grantingonline
access to collections.

(a)[In particular if you are an institutional user:]Have you
experienced specific problems when trying to negotiate
agreements with rights holders that enable you to provide
remote access, including across borders,to your collections (or
parts thereof) for purposes of research and private study?

(b)[Inparticular if you are an enduser/consumer:]Have you
experienced specific problems when trying to consult, including
across borders,works and other subject-matter held in the
collections of institutions such as universities and national
libraries when you are not on the premises of the institutions
in question?

(c)[In particular if you are arightholder:]Have you negotiated
agreements with institutional users that enable those
institutions to provide remote access, including across
borders,to the works or other subject-matter in their
collections, for purposes of research and private study?

[Open question]

En France, la loi du 1ermars 2012 prévoit une numérisation des
livres indisponibles du XXe siècle publiés en France etdonne
mandat à une société agréée pour autoriser leurnumérisation et
leur accès moyennant autorisation.La loia confiéà la
Bibliothèque nationale de France(BNF)la responsabilité de
créer et de maintenir une base de donnéespubliques intitulée
ReLIRE (Registre des Livres Indisponibles en Réédition
électronique), qui répertorie les livres indisponibles du
XXe siècle(à ce jour 60 000 livres environ sont disponibleset
500 000 livres pourront être identifiés au cours des dix
prochaines années).

Par ailleurs, les éditeurs ont développé des licences
d’acquisition de leurs contenus numériques afin que les
étudiants et les chercheurs aient accès à distance aux
contenus.On peut donc constater que le système de licences
contractuelles est plus flexible, adaptable aux conditions
spécifiques et plus respectueuses du droit des auteurs qu’une
exception légale.

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

If there are problems, how would they best be solved?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

If your view is that a legislative solution is needed, what
would be its main elements? Which activities of the beneficiary
institutions should be covered and under which conditions?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

If your view is thatadifferent solutionisneeded, what would it
be?

[Open question]

Tout élargissement del’exception
“bibliothèques”autorisantcelles-cià numériser et mettre en
ligne les contenus protégés reviendrait à empêcher les
titulaires de droit de le faire puisque les bibliothèques
proposeraient les mêmes œuvres gratuitement.Cela serait
contraire au respect du test des trois étapes de la convention
de Berne. Il convient donc d’être très prudent.

E – lending

Traditionally, public libraries haveloanedphysical copies of
works (i.e. books, sometimes also CDs and DVDs) to their users.
Recent technological developments have made it technically
possible for libraries to provide users with temporary access
to digital content, such as e-books, music or films via
networks. Under the current legal framework, libraries need to
obtain the authorisation of the rights holders to
organisesuche-lending activities. In various Member States,
publishers and libraries are currently experimenting with
different business models for the making available of works
online, including direct supply of e-books to libraries by
publishers or bundling byaggregators.

a)[In particular if you are alibrary:]Have you experienced
specific problems when trying tonegotiate agreements to enable
the electronic lending(e-lending), including across borders, of
books or other materials held in your collection?

(b)[In particular if you are an enduser/consumer:]Haveyou
experienced specific problems when trying to borrow booksor
other materialselectronically (e-lending), including across
borders,from institutionssuch as public libraries?

(c)[In particular if you are aright holder:]Have you negotiated
agreements with libraries to enable them to lend books or other
materials electronically, including across borders?

XYES – Please explain with specific examples

Différents modèles sont actuellement expérimentés dans le
domaine du livre afin de permettre un équilibre entre droits
des consommateurs et le respect d’un modèle économique fiable
permettant une rémunération proportionnelle aux usages qui
seront faits des ouvrages. Il convient d’attendre encore un peu
pour savoir si ces modèles seront économiquement réalistes mais
nous pouvons d’ores et déjà constater que le cadre contractuel
existant permet d’encadrer ces pratiques.Une étude de mars 2013
(à l’initiative du Ministère de la Culture) intitulée IDATE sur
l’offre commerciale de livres numériques à destination des
bibliothèques n’a pas constaté d’insuffisance de l’offre, au
contraire. La réussite de ces initiatives doit de toute façon
aller de pair avec une véritable politique des pouvoirs publics
d aide à l’achat d’équipements informatiques adéquats, entretien
des serveurs, achat de contenus etc.. Le prêt
inter-bibliothèques est favorisé aussi.Toutefois il convient
d’être très prudent étant donné la fragilité de la vente
numérique pour le moment.

NO

NO OPINION

If there are problems, how wouldtheybest be solved?

[Open question]

The following two questions are relevant bothtothis point (n° 3)
and the previous one (n° 2).

In particular if you are an institutional user:]What differences
do you see in the management of physical and online collections,
including providing access to your subscribers? What problems
have you encountered?

[Open question]…………………………………………………………

[In particular if you are a right holder:]What difference do you
see between libraries’traditional activities such as on-premises
consultation or public lending and activities such as
off-premises (online, at a distance) consultation and
e-lending? What problems have you encountered?

[Open question]

En cas de prêt temporaire de fichiers numériques via les
réseaux, des licences doivent être signées entre les
titulaires des droits et les bibliothèques. Plusieurs problèmes
pourraient se poser comme les risques de dissémination des
fichiers, une concurrence forte avec les ventes physiques de
fichiers numériques dans un marché encore naissant et fragile,
le fait que le lecteur n’ait plus ni attente, ni à se déplacer
Il convient donc d’être très prudent. Dans certains pays il a
été constaté que ce type de prêt a empêché tout développement
de la vente de livres numériques (ex : Suède et Danemark).
Quand un modèle économique rentable sera trouvé pour les ventes
numériques, le problème se posera différemment.

cfréponse précédente

Mass digitisation

The term “mass digitisation” is normally used to refer to
efforts by institutions such as libraries and archives to
digitise (e.g. scan) the entire content or part of their
collections with an objective to preserve these collections
and, normally, to make them available to the public. Examples
are efforts by libraries to digitise novels form the early part
of the 20thcentury or whole collections of pictures of
historical value. This matter has been partly addressed at the
EU level by the 2011 Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) on key
principles on the digitisationand making available of out
of commerce works (i.e. works which are no longer found in the
normal channels of commerce),which isaimingto facilitatemass
digitisation efforts (for books and learned journals) on the
basis of licence agreements between libraries and similar
cultural institutions on the one hand and the collecting
societies representing authors and publishers on the other29

You will find more information about his MoU on the following
website:http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/copyright/out-of-commerce/index_en.htm.

.Provided the required funding is ensured(digitisation projects
are extremely expensive),the result of this MoU should bethat
books that are currently to be found only in the archives of,
for instance, libraries will be digitised and made available
online to everyone.The MoU is based on voluntary licences
(granted by Collective Management Organisations on the basis of
the mandates they receive from authors and publishers). Some
Member States may need to enact legislation to ensure the
largest possible effect ofsuchlicences (e.g. by establishing in
legislation a presumption of representation of a collecting
society or the recognition of an “extended effect” to the
licences granted)30

France and Germany have already adopted legislation to back the
effects of the MoU.The French act (LOI n° 2012-287 du 1er mars
2012 relative à l'exploitation numérique des livres
indisponibles du xxe siècle) foresees collectivemanagement,
unless the author or publisher in question opposes such
management.The German act (Gesetz zur Nutzung verwaister und
vergriffener Werke und einer weiteren Änderung des
Urheberrechtsgesetzes vom 1.Oktober 2013) contains a legal
presumption of representation by a collectingsociety in
relation to works whose rightholdersare not members of the
collecting society.

.

In particular if you are an institutional user,engaging or
wanting to engage in mass digitisation projects,a rightholder,a
collective management organisation:]Would itbe necessaryin your
country to enact legislationto ensure thattheresults of the
2011 MoU (i.e. the agreements concluded between libraries and
collecting societies) havea cross-border effect sothatout of
commerce workscan be accessedacross the EU?

 YES – Please explain why and how it could best be achieved

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

xNO– Please explain

En France, la loi du 1ermars 2012 prévoit déjà une numérisation
des livres indisponibles du XXe siècle publiés en France etun
système donnantmandat à une société agréée pour autoriser leur
numérisation et leur accès moyennant autorisation.La loia
confiéà la Bibliothèque nationale de France(BNF)la
responsabilité de créer et de maintenir une base de
donnéespubliques intitulée ReLIRE (Registre des Livres
Indisponibles en Rééditionélectronique), qui répertorie les
livres indisponibles du XXe siècle(à ce jour 60 000 livres
environ sont disponibles et 500 000 livres pourront être
identifiés au cours des dix prochaines années).Il s’agit d’un
système de gestion obligatoire desœuvresindisponibles sans
recours donc à une exception. Seule l’Allemagnea mis aussi en
place un système permettant la numérisation des livres protégés
indisponibles;Dans le domaine de la musique, la problématique
est différente étant donné que le système de rentabilité des
coûts engagés est plus long dans le temps. Lesœuvressont donc
disponibles plus longtemps et par ailleurs la gestion
collective étant très répandue, il est toujours possible
d’obtenir des autorisations sur les répertoires.

NO OPINION

41.Would it be necessary to develop mechanisms, beyond those
already agreed for other types of content (e.g. for audio- or
audio-visual collections, broadcasters’ archives)?

 YES – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

X NO – Please explain

CF réponse précédente

X NO OPINION

Teaching

Directive 2001/29/EC31

Article 5(3)aof Directive 2001/29.

enables Member States to implement in their national
legislationlimitations and exceptionsfor the purpose of
illustration fornon-commercialteaching. Such exceptions would
typically allow a teacher to use parts of or full works to
illustrate his course,e.g.by distributing copies of fragments
of a book or of newspaper articles in the classroom or by
showing protected content on a smart boardwithout having to
obtain authorisation from the right holders.The open
formulation of this (optional) provision allows for rather
different implementation at Member States level.The
implementation of the exception differs from Member State to
Member State, with several Member States providinginsteada
framework for the licensing of contentforcertain
educationaluses. Some argue that the lawshould provide for
better possibilities for distance learningand study at home.

42.(a)[In particular if youare an enduser/consumeror an
institutional user:]Have you experienced specific problems when
trying to use works orother subject-matter for illustration for
teaching, including across borders?

(b)[In particular if youare aright holder:]Have youexperienced
specificproblems resulting from the wayin which works or other
subject-matter are used for illustration for teaching,
including across borders?

YES–Please explain

a) Specific problems can be experienced especially on the
educational field, because 23 different languages in display in
the EU don’t make for an easy cross-border use of abroad
resources, not to mention 28 national different curricula,
along to different pedagogical approaches….

XNO

Le législateur a prévu en 2006 une exception pédagogique
partielle (article L122-5 e) du Code de la Propriété
Intellectuelle)pour les enseignants des écoles, collèges,
lycées ou universités. Mais afin de préserver les marchés de
certains œuvres et respecter aussi le test des trois
étapesprévu par la Convention de Berne, il a décidé que cette
exception ne s’appliquait pas notamment ni aux partitions de
musique, ni aux œuvres conçues à des fins pédagogiques. Cette
exclusion de notre secteur n’a pas pour autant entravé le
travail pédagogique de l’enseignement musical, ni fait peser
des contraintes sur l’apprentissage de la musique, bien au
contraire.

Tout d’abord, les éditeurs de musique proposent aux enseignants
et aux élèves des versions numériques de leurs œuvres mais
notre société, la SEAM,a signéaussien 2006 aux côtés des
représentants du livre, de la presse et des arts visuels, un
accord avec le Ministère de l’Education Nationaleet le
Ministère de l’Enseignement supérieur et de la recherchepour
l’utilisation des œuvres musicales graphiques (partitions de
musique, méthodes, paroles de chansons..) à des fins
d’illustration des activités d’enseignement et de recherche.
Cetaccord couvrantun large ensemble d’utilisations d’œuvres
protégéesest le produit d’une concertation entre les
signataires. Il a permis le respect des équilibres entre
utilisation d’œuvres et activités d’enseignement et permet
aussi une flexibilité puisque ces accords évoluent dans le
temps en fonction des besoins.Cet accord couvre lesbesoins
numériques pédagogiques des enseignants et de leurs élèves
prévoyant la possibilité d’une diffusion numérique de travail
notamment accessibles par des étudiants à l’étranger.

NO OPINION

43 ;If there are problems, how wouldtheybest be solved?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

What mechanisms exist in the market place to facilitate the use
of content for illustration for teaching purposes?How
successful are they?

[Open question]

Outre les licences passées avec les éditeurs de musique, le
protocole d’accord précédemment cité et signé en 2006 entre les
ministères de l’Education Nationale et de l’Enseignement
supérieur et les ayants droit, permet aux enseignants des
écoles, lycées, collèges ou universités d’utiliser et de
diffuser sur les intranets des établissements des extraits
d’œuvresmusicales graphiques. Les difficultés sont plutôt
d’ordre budgétaires, lors des re-négociations de contrats
avec les pouvoirs publics.

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

45.If your view is that a legislative solution is needed, what
would be its main elements? Which activities of the beneficiary
institutions should be covered and under what conditions?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

your view is thatadifferent solutionisneeded, what would it be?

[Open question]

L’édition musicale graphique (partitions de musique, songbooks,
méthodes etc.) est un secteur fragile et quasi artisanal mais
qui fait vivre un nombre non négligeable d’auteurs, de
compositeurs et d’éditeurs de musique.En musique imprimée,
utiliser un simple extrait revient à utiliser l’œuvreelle-même,
son thème, son essence même.

Aussi, privilégier la méthode contractuelle,protéger ce marché
qui fait partie de notre patrimoine culturel est primordial. Un
dispositif contractuel, à l’inverse d’un dispositif légal que ce
soit au niveau national ou européen, permet un dialogue, une
souplesse, un équilibre et la possibilité pour les plus faibles
de s’exprimer. Le secteur pédagogique (enseignement général et
spécialisé comme les écoles et conservatoires de musique)
représente un secteur clef pour la vente de partitions de
musique, de méthodes instrumentales, de livres sur la musique
etc.. Le moindre bouleversement des équilibres pourrait
entraîner une rupture et un appauvrissement des sources et de
leur diversité car les éditeurs de musique déjà affaiblis ne
pourraient plus éditer de nouveautés. Cela pénaliserait ainsi
les ressources pouvant être mises à la disposition des
enseignants et de leurs élèves.Des systèmes de licences
contractuelles ont été mis en place par les ayants droit via la
gestion collective que ce soit pour les usages traditionnels
(représentation en classe, reprographie..) ou numériques et il
convient afin que les équilibres soient préservés decontinuer
àprivilégier cette voie.

Research

Directive 2001/29/EC32

Article 5(3)a of Directive 2001/29.

enables Member States to choose whether to implement in their
national laws a limitation for the purpose of non-commercial
scientific research.Theopenformulation of this (optional)
provision allows forratherdifferent implementationsat Member
States level.

(a)[In particular if you arean enduser/consumeror an
institutional user:]Haveyou experienced specific problems when
trying to use works or other subject matter in thecontextof
research projects/activities, including across borders?

(b)[In particular if you area right holder:]Haveyouexperienced
specificproblems resulting from the wayin which works or other
subject-matter are usedin thecontextof research
projects/activities, including across borders?

YES – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

XNO

Dans l’enseignement supérieur, les éditeurs ont développé des
licences d’acquisition des contenus numériques que les
étudiants peuvent consulter à distancey compris depuis
l’étranger. Par ailleurs, comme expliqué précédemment,la
Seam,a signéen 2006 aux côtés des représentants du livre, de la
presse et des arts visuels, un accord avec le Ministère de
l’Education Nationaleet le Ministère de l’enseignement
supérieur et de la recherchepour l’utilisation des œuvres
musicales graphiques (partitions de musique, méthodes, paroles
de chansons..) à des fins d’illustration des activités
d’enseignement et de recherchedans notamment l’enseignement
supérieur. Cet accord couvrant un large ensemble d’utilisations
d’œuvres protégées est le produit d’une concertation entre les
signataires. Il a permis le respect des équilibres entre
utilisation d’œuvres et activités d’enseignement et permet
aussi une flexibilité puisque ces accords évoluent dans le
temps en fonction des besoins. Cet accord couvre les besoins
numériques pédagogiques des enseignants et de leurs élèves
prévoyant la possibilité d’une diffusion numérique de travail
notamment accessibles par des étudiants à l’étrangersur un
réseau sécurisé.

NO OPINION

If there are problems, how wouldtheybest be solved?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

What mechanisms exist in the Member States to facilitate the use
of content for research purposes?How successful are they?

[Open question]

Cf réponse à la question 47

Disabilities

Directive 2001/29/EC33

Article 5 (3)b of Directive 2001/29.

provides for an exception/limitation for the benefit of people
with a disability.The open formulation of this (optional)
provision allows for rather different implementations at Member
States level.At EU and international level projects have been
launched to increase the accessibilityof works and other
subject-matterforpersons with disabilities (notably by
increasing the number of works published in special formats and
facilitating their distribution across the European Union)34

The European Trusted Intermediaries Network (ETIN)resulting
froma Memorandum of Understanding betweenrepresentatives of the
right-holder community (publishers, authors, collecting
societies) and interested parties such as associations for
blind and dyslexic
persons(http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/copyright/initiatives/access/index_en.htm)
and the Trusted Intermediary Global Accessible Resources (TIGAR)
project in WIPO (http://www.visionip.org/portal/en/).

.

The Marrakesh Treaty35

MarrakeshTreaty to Facilitate Access to Published Works by
Visually Impaired Persons and Persons with Print
Disabilities,Marrakesh, June 17 to 282013.

has been adopted to facilitate access to published works for
persons who are blind, visually impaired, or otherwise print
disabled. The Treaty creates a mandatory exception to copyright
that allows organisations for the blind to produce, distribute
and make available accessible format copies to visually
impaired persons without the authorisation of the rightholders.
The EU and its Member Stateshave startedwork to sign and ratify
the Treaty. This may require the adoption of certain provisions
at EU level (e.g. to ensure the possibility to exchange
accessible format copies across borders).

(a)[Inparticular if you are a person with a disability or an
organisation representing persons with disabilities:]Have you
experienced problems with accessibility to content, including
across borders,arising from Member States’ implementation of
this exception?

(b)[Inparticular if you are an organisationproviding services
for persons with disabilities:]Have you experienced problems
when distributing/communicating works published in special
formats across the EU?

(c)[In particular if you are a rightholder:]Have you experienced
specificproblems resulting fromthe application of limitations or
exceptions allowing for the distribution/communication of works
published in special formats, including across borders?

YES–Please explainby giving examples

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

XNO

En France, la loidu 1erAoût 2006 et son décret du 19 décembre
2008 ont introduitune exception en faveur des personnes
atteintes de handicap (article L122-5 du Code de la Propriété
Intellectuelle).Cette exception vise tous les types de handicap
sous certaines conditions et tous les types de supports
disponibles (éditions de livre, presse, édition musicale)sont
concernés. Elle autorise la reproduction et la représentation
de ces œuvrespardes organismes agréés qui procèdent à
l’adaptation des œuvres et les mettent à la disposition des
personnes atteintes de handicap. La BNF a été désignée comme
organisme dépositaire chargé de permettre le transfert sécurisé
des documents numériques entre éditeurs et organismes agréés.
Dans ce cadre, la BNF a créée la plateforme d’échanges
sécurisés PLATON (Plateforme de Transfert des Ouvrages
numériques) mis en service dès 2010.

A ce jour, 4000 ouvrages ont été adaptés sur 10 0000 disponibles
sur la plateforme (350 éditeurs). Aucune demande quasiment n’a
étéformulée pourles œuvres musicales graphiques.70
associations dont 26 de niveau 2 (c’est-à-dire habilitées à
demander les fichiers sources des éditeurs via Platon) ont été
agréées.

Des réunions sous l’égide du Ministère de la Culture sont
organisées actuellement pour améliorer le texte de l’exception
afin de la simplifier et élargir le champs d’application de
celle-ci.

Il est à noter que le 28 juin 2013 à Marrakech, les membres de
l’OMPI dont la France ont adopté un Traité instaurant un
cadre juridique plus contraignant afin que l’exception soit
mieux harmonisée au sein des pays membres et afin de favoriser
le développement des échanges entre pays.Parmi les initiatives,
un projet intitulé TIGAR (Trusted intermediaryglobal accessible
resources) auquel participent de nombreux groupes d’édition
français permet déjà la circulation d’œuvres adaptées entre 20
pays. Un autre projet européen (ETIN= European Trusted
Intermediary Network) promeut la création de guichets nationaux
uniques pour accorder des permissions d’exportation de ces
œuvres adaptées.

If there are problems, what could be done to improve
accessibility?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

What mechanisms exist in the market place to facilitate
accessibility to content? How successful are they?

[Open question]

Cf réponse précédente.

EText and data mining

Text and data mining/content mining/data analytics are different
terms used to describe increasingly important techniques used in
particular by researchers for the exploration of vast amounts of
existing texts and data (e.g., journals, web sites, databases
etc.). Through the use of software or other automated
processes, an analysis is made of relevant texts and data in
order to obtain new insights, patterns and trends.

The texts and data used for mining are either freely accessible
on the internet or accessible through subscriptions to e.g.
journals and periodicals that give access to the databases of
publishers. A copy is made of the relevant texts and data (e.g.
on browser cache memories or in computers RAM memories or onto
the hard disk of a computer), prior to the actual analysis.
Normally, it is considered that to mine protected works or
other subject matter, it is necessary to obtain authorisation
from the right holders for the making of such copies unless
such authorisation can be implied (e.g. content accessible to
general public without restrictions on the internet, open
access).

Some argue that the copies required for text and data mining are
covered by the exception for temporary copies in Article 5.1 of
Directive 2001/29/EC. Others consider that text and data mining
activities should not even be seen as covered by copyright. None
of thisis clear, in particular since text and data mining does
not consist only of a single method, but can be undertaken in
several different ways. Important questions also remain as to
whether the main problems arising in relation to this issue go
beyond copyright (i.e. beyond the necessity or not to obtain
the authorisation to use content) and relate rather to the need
to obtain “access” to content (i.e. being able to use e.g.
commercial databases).

A specific Working Group was set up on this issue in the
framework of the "Licences for Europe" stakeholder dialogue. No
consensus was reached among participating stakeholders on either
the problems to be addressed or the results. At the same time,
practical solutions to facilitate text and data mining of
subscription-based scientific content were presented by
publishers as an outcome of “Licences for Europe”.In the
context of thesediscussions, other stakeholders argued that no
additional licences should be required to mine material to
which access has been provided through a subscriptionagreement
and considered that a specificexception for text and data
mining should be introduced, possibly on the basis of
a distinction between commercial and non-commercial.

a)[In particular if you are an enduser/consumeror an
institutional user:]Haveyou experiencedobstacles,linked to
copyright,when trying to usetext or data miningmethods,
including across borders?

(b)[In particular if you are aservice provider:]Have you
experienced obstacles, linked to copyright, when providing
services based on text or data mining methods, including across
borders?

(c)[In particular if you are a rightholder:]Have you experienced
specificproblems resulting fromthe use of text and data mining
in relation to copyright protected content, including across
borders?

YES–Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

xNO–Please explain

La problématique ne se pose pas pour le moment pour les œuvres
musicales graphiques. Dans le domaine des œuvres musicales
enregistrées, la Sacem a signé un accord avec des services
comme Shazam et SoundHound qui utilisent les techniques de data
mining sur ces œuvres à des fins de reconnaissance vocale.

L’instauration d’une exception serait inappropriée et la voie
contractuelle doit être privilégiée. Les sociétés de gestion
collective et les sociétés de gestion collective peuvent tout à
fait accorder des autorisations pour ces usages. Une exception
pourrait permettre de légaliser des activités de piratage ou de
parasitisme des contenus par exemple par les moteurs de
recherche.

NO OPINION

If there are problems, how wouldtheybest be solved?

[Open question]

If your view is that a legislative solution is needed, what
would be its main elements? Which activities should be covered
and under what conditions?

[Open question]

If your view is thatadifferent solutionisneeded, what would it
be?

Open question]

Il convient d’être très prudent et de privilégier l’accord des
ayants droit par des licences ou par la voie de la gestion
collective.Il convient de renforcer la protection des
titulaires de droits pour éviter que les contenus soient
utilisés par les producteurs de base de données sans
autorisation et sans rémunération.

Le CSPLA (Conseil Supérieur de la Propriété Littéraire et
Artistique) travaille en ce moment sur ce sujet sous l’égide du
Ministère de la Culture. Il convient donc d’être prudent et de
toujours privilégier la voie contractuelle.

Are there other issues, unrelated to copyright, that constitute
barriers to the use of text or data mining methods?

[Open question]

FUser-generated content

Technological and service developments mean that citizens can
copy, use and distribute content at little to no financial
cost. As a consequence, new types of online activities are
developing rapidly, including the making of so-called
“user-generated content”. While users can create totally
original content, they can also take one or several
pre-existing works, change something in the work(s), and upload
the result on the Internet e.g. to platforms and blogs36

A typical example could be the “kitchen” or “wedding” video
(adding one's own video to a pre-existing sound recording), or
adding one's own text to a pre-existing photograph.Other
examples are “mash-ups” (blending two sound recordings), and
reproducing parts of journalistic work (report, review etc.) in
a blog.

. User-generated content (UGC) can thus coverthe modification of
pre-existing works even if the newly-generated/"uploaded" work
does not necessarily require a creative effort and results from
merely adding, subtracting or associating some pre-existing
content with other pre-existing content. This kind of activity
is not “new” as such. However, the development of social
networking and social media sites that enable users to share
content widely has vastly changed the scale of such activities
and increased the potential economic impact for those holding
rights in the pre-existing works. Re-use is no longer the
preserve of a technically and artistically adept elite. With
the possibilities offered by the new technologies, re-use is
open to all, at no cost. This in turn raises questions with
regard to fundamental rights such the freedom of expression and
the right to property.

A specific Working Group was set up on this issue in the
framework of the"Licences for Europe" stakeholder dialogue. No
consensuswas reachedamong participating stakeholders on either
the problems tobe addressed or the resultsor even the
definition of UGC. Nevertheless, awide range of viewswere
presentedas to the best way to respond to this phenomenon.
Oneviewwasto say that a new exception is needed to cover UGC,
in particular non-commercial activities by individuals such as
combining existing musical works with videos, sequences of
photos, etc. Anotherview wasthat no legislative change is
needed: UGC is flourishing, and licensing schemes are
increasingly available (licence schemes concluded between
rightholders and platforms as well as micro-licences concluded
between rightholders and the usersgenerating thecontent. In any
event, practical solutions to ease user-generated content and
facilitate micro-licensing for small users were pledged by
rightholders across different sectors as a result of the
“Licences for Europe” discussions37

See the document “Licences for Europe – tenpledges to bring more
content
online”:http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/copyright/docs/licences-for-europe/131113_ten-pledges_en.pdf.

.

(a)[In particular if you are an enduser/consumer:]Have you
experienced problems when trying to use pre-existing works or
other subject matter to disseminate new content on the
Internet, including across borders?

(b)[In particular if you are a service provider:]Have you
experienced problems when users publish/disseminatenew content
based on the pre-existing works or other subject-matter through
your service, including across borders?

(c)[In particular if you are a right holder:]Have you
experienced problems resulting from the way the users are using
pre-existing works or other subject-matter to disseminate new
content on the Internet, including across borders?

 YES – Please explain by giving examples

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

XNO

Les œuvres transformatives se développent et permettent en effet
à chaque citoyen de créer de nouvelles œuvres à partir d’œuvre
pré existantes. Mais ces œuvres servent les intérêts des
fournisseurs de services et donnent lieu à une activité
économique au profit de ces professionnels en un détournement
ou une captation de valeur. Il convient donc de protéger les
intérêts des ayants droit en évitant à tout prix l’instauration
d’une exception et encourager les licences. Il n’existe pas de
vide juridique en la matièreet la plupart des législations
nationales prévoient déjà des outils comme l’exception de
courte citation, ou de parodie/pastiche en France. L’auteur
d’une œuvre seconde doit demander l’autorisation de l’auteur
de l’œuvre première afin que les droits de chacun soient
respectés que ce soit les droits d’exploitation ou le droit
moral (traduction, adaptation, arrangement, etc..

NO OPINION

(a)[In particular if you are an end user/consumer or aright
holder:]Have you experienced problems when trying to ensure
that the work you have created (on the basis of pre-existing
works) is properly identified for online use?Are proprietary
systems sufficient in this context?

(b)[In particular if you are a service provider:]Do you provide
possibilities for users that are publishing/disseminating the
works they have created (on the basis of pre-existing works)
through your service to properly identify these works for
online use?

 YES – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

X NO– Please explain

Comme nous l’avons dit précédemment il n’existe aucun vide
juridique en la matière et les systèmes d’identification déjà
en place via la gestion collective notamment sont suffisants.
L’initiative GRD (Global Repertoire Database) en cours
d’élaboration dans le secteur musical permettra une
amélioration encore plus efficace des systèmes
d’identification.

NO OPINION

a))[In particular if you are an enduser/consumeror aright
holder):]Have you experienced problems when trying to be
remunerated for the use of the work you have created (on the
basis of pre-existing works)?

(b)[In particular if you are a service provider:]Do you provide
remuneration schemes for users publishing/disseminating the
works they have created (on the basis of pre-existing works)
through your service?

YES – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO OPINION

there are problems, how would they best be solved?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

your view is that a legislative solution is needed, what would
be its main elements? Which activities should be covered and
under what conditions?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

your view is thatadifferent solutionisneeded, what would it be?

[Open question]

Comme dit précédemment, il n’y a aucun vide juridique en la
matière. Des instruments sont à la disposition des créateurs
d’œuvres transformatives, des ayants droit et des
fournisseurs de services afin de permettre à tous de se
développer. Ce qui est différent c’est l’ampleur de la
dissémination de ces œuvres transformées via le net ou les
réseaux sociaux. Dans le cadre de Licences pour l’Europe le
groupe de travail créé sur ces questions n’a pu dégager aucun
consensus. Il convient donc d’être prudent et de privilégier la
voie contractuelle et la gestion collective.

IVPrivate copying and reprography

Directive 2001/29/EC enables Member States to implement in their
national legislation exceptions or limitations to the
reproduction right for copies made for private useand
photocopying38

Article 5. 2)(a) and (b)of Directive 2001/29.

.Levies are charges imposed at national level on goods typically
used forsuch purposes(blank media, recording equipment,
photocopying machines, mobile listeningdevices such as mp3/mp4
players, computers, etc.) with a viewtocompensating
rightholders forthe harm they suffer whencopiesaremade
withouttheirauthorisation by certain categories of persons
(i.e. natural persons making copies for their private use)
orthrough use of certain technique (i.e. reprography).In that
context, levies are important for rightholders.

With the constant developments in digital technology, the
question arises as to whether the copying of files by
consumers/end-users who have purchased content online - e.g.
when a person has bought an MP3 fileandgoes on
tostoremultiplecopies of thatfile(in her computer, her tablet
and her mobile phone) -alsotriggers, or should trigger,the
application of private copying levies. It is argued that, in
some cases,these leviesmay indeedbe claimedby
rightholderswhetheror notthelicence feepaid by the service
provideralready covers copies made bythe enduser.
Thisapproachcould potentially lead to instances of double
payments whereby levies could be claimed on top ofservice
providers’licencefees39

Communication "Unleashing the Potential of Cloud Computing in
Europe", COM(2012) 529 final.

40

These issues were addressed in the recommendations of Mr António
Vitorino resulting from the mediation on private copying and
reprography levies.Youcan consult these recommendationson the
following
website:http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/copyright/docs/levy_reform/130131_levies-vitorino-recommendations_en.pdf.

.

There is also an on-going discussion as to the application or
not of levies to certain types of cloud-based services such as
personal lockers or personal video recorders

In your view, is there a need to clarify at the EU level the
scope and application of theprivate copyingand
reprographyexceptions41

Art. 5.2(a) and 5.2(b) of Directive 2001/29/EC.

in the digital environment?

YES–Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

XNO – Please explain

En France le système en vigueur pour la reprographie est un
régime de gestion collective obligatoire et pour la musique,
c’est notre société, la Seamqui est la société agréée par le
Ministère de la Culture.Notre société passe des accords avec
les utilisateurs de photocopies (écoles et conservatoires de
musique, établissements de l’Education Nationale, orchestres
etc..).Pour le livre et la presse, il s’agit du CFC(Centre
Français d’exploitation du droit de copie).

Il s’agit des usages collectifs et publiquesde la
reprographiecontrairement à la copie privée qui couvre les
usages privés selon le régime de la licence légale et dont
Copie France perçoit les redevances auprès des
utilisateurs(importateurs, fabricants de supports vierges
d’enregistrement..)et les redistribue pour la musique
graphique à notre société, la Seamet aux autres secteurs..

La distinctionestdonctrès claire et il n’y aucun besoin de
clarification.

…………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO OPINION

Should digital copies made by end users for private purposes in
the context of a service that has been licensed by
rightholders, and where theharmto the rightholder is minimal,
be subject to private copying levies?42

This issue was also addressed in the recommendations of Mr
Antonio Vitorino resulting from the mediation on private
copying and reprography levies

 YES – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

XNO – Please explain

Il serait inexactde penser queparce qu’il y a autorisation par
l’ayant droit de diffusion, il y a maîtrise desutilisations
ultérieures. Les copies effectuées à des fins privées par des
utilisateurs étant donné la modernité des supports
d’enregistrement peuvent au contraire causer un préjudice
nécessitant une rémunération pour copie privée. De plus, dans
notre secteur de la musique imprimée, les contenus sontproposés
sans mesurede protection technique (MTP) ne permettant donc pas
le contrôle du nombre de copies.Toutefois, le régime existant
prend en compteles licences etl’existence éventuelle de DRM
dans le calcul de la rémunération.

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO OPINION

How would changes in levies with respect to the application to
online services (e.g. services based oncloud computingallowing,
for instance, users to have copies on different devices) impact
the development and functioning of new business models on the
one hand and rightholders’ revenue on the other?

[Open question]

Concernant l’application de la copie privée sur de nouveaux
schémas de services en ligne, c’est au législateur national de
décider et non au législateur européen. La question est délicate
et doit être adaptée à chaque situation nationale. Ces nouveaux
schémas n’ont pour le moment pas d’impact sur les revenus des
ayants droit.

Il convient de souligner que dans le secteur de la musique
graphique,les revenus provenant de la copie privée sont
essentiels. Il en est de même bien sûr pour la musique
enregistréeet pour les autres secteurs. Ainsi la copie privée
numérique graphique représente quasiment un tiers des
redevances collectées par la Seam. Il est donc primordial de
préserver les équilibres actuels.

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

Would you see an added value in making levies visibleon the
invoices for products subject to levies?43

This issue was also addressed in the recommendations of Mr
Antonio Vitorino resulting from the mediation on private
copying and reprography levies.

XYES – Please explain

La loi française du 20/12/2011 relative à la copie privéea
choisi justement de porter à la connaissance de l’utilisateur
de tout support d’enregistrement le montant de larémunération
pour copie privée et met à leur dispositionune notice
explicative que ce soit par affichage dans le lieu de vente ou
par tous moyens pour les achats via internet. Lorsque l’achat
est effectué par un professionnel, l’information figure sur la
facture même avec la mention de la possibilité de remboursement
de la rémunération acquittée. Des amendes sont prévues en cas de
non-respect de ces obligations.Le décret du 10/12/2013 organise
de manière précise cette information qui sera mise en vigueur à
compter du 1eravril 2014.L’information du consommateur est en
effet utile dans un souci de transparence.

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO–Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO OPINION

Divergingnational systems levy different products and apply
different tariffs. This results in obstacles tothefree
circulation of goods and servicesin the Single Market.At the
same time, many Member States continue to
allowtheindiscriminate application of private copying levies to
all transactions irrespective of the person to whom the product
subject to a levyis sold(e.g. private person or business). In
that context, not all Member States have ex ante exemption
and/or ex post reimbursement schemes which could remedy these
situations and reduce the number of undue payments44

This issue was also addressed in the recommendations of Mr
Antonio Vitorino resulting from the mediation on private
copying and reprography levies.

.

Have you experienced a situation whereacross-border transaction
resulted inundue levy payments, or duplicate payments of the
same levy, or other obstacles to the free movement of goods or
services?

YES–Pleasespecify the type of transaction and indicate
thepercentageoftheundue payments. Please also indicatehow a
priori exemption and/orex post reimbursement schemes could help
to remedy the situation.

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

…………………………………………

…………………………………………………….

XNO – Please explain

Le fait générateur du paiement de la copie privée est la mise en
circulation en France du support. Ainsi la rémunération pour
copie privée n’est pas perçue pour les supports destinés à
l’exportation tant qu’ils n’ontpas été mis en circulation sur
le territoire français. Un support importé et réexporté
directement par l’importateur ne sera pas soumis au paiement de
la RCP.

En revanche, si le support est importé, mis en circulation puis
exporté, l’importateur devra acquitter la RCP auprès de Copie
France qui la lui remboursera sur présentation de justificatifs
attestant de l’exportation du support. Le système est donc prévu
par la loi et ne présente aucun problème.

NO OPINION

What percentage of products subject to a levy is sold to persons
other than natural persons for purposesclearly unrelated to
private copying? Do any of those transactions result in undue
payments? Please explain in detail the example you provide
(type of products, type of transaction, stakeholders, etc.).

[Open question]

En Francela loi française(article L311-8 du Code de la Propriété
Intellectuelle)prévoit quelarémunération pour copie privée n’est
pas due lorsque le support d’enregistrement est acquis pour leur
propre usage ou production par les entreprises de communication
audiovisuelle, les producteurs de phonogrammes ou
vidéogrammeset les personnes qui assurent, pour le compte des
producteurs la reproduction de celles-ci, les éditeurs d’œuvres
publiées sur des supports numériques et les personnes morales ou
organismes dont la liste est arrêtée par le Ministre chargé de
la culture, qui utilisent les supports d’enregistrement à des
fins d’aide aux handicapés visuels ou auditifs.

La rémunération n’est pas due non plus sur les supports
d’enregistrement acquis notamment à des fins professionnelles
dont les conditions d’utilisation ne permettent pas de présumer
un usage à des fins de copie privée. Une procédure de
remboursement est alorsprévue auprès de Copie France.

Là encore, on peut constater que le système prévu en Franceest
conforme au droit européen.

En 2011, la part des usages professionnels s’est élevéeàenviron
à 10% des droits collectés soit 17Millions d’Euros remboursés
sur 174 Millions d’Euros.

Where such undue payments arise, what percentage of trade do
they affect? To what extent could a priori exemptionsand/orex
post reimbursement schemes existing in some Member States help
to remedy the situation?

[Open question]

Cf réponse précédente. Système prévu en France.

fyou have identified specificproblemswith the current
functioning of the levy system, howwould these
problemsbestbesolved?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

VFairremuneration of authors and performers

TheEUcopyrightacquisrecognises for authors and performers a
number of exclusive rights and, in the case of performers whose
performances are fixed in phonograms, remuneration rights. There
are few provisions in the EU copyright law governing
thetransferof rights fromauthors or performers to producers45

See e.g. Directive 92/100/EEC, Art.2(4)-(7).

or determining who the owner of the rights is when the work or
other subject matter is created in the context of an employment
contract46

See e.g.Art. 2.3. of Directive 2009/24/EC,Art. 4 of Directive
96/9/EC.

. Thisis an area that has been traditionally left for Member
States to regulate and there are significant differences in
regulatory approaches.Substantial differences also exist
between different sectors of the creative industries.

Concerns continue to be raised that authors and performers are
not adequately remunerated, in particular but not solely, as
regards online exploitation. Many consider that the economic
benefit of new forms of exploitation is not being fairly shared
along the whole value chain. Another commonly raised issue
concerns contractual practices, negotiation mechanisms,
presumptions of transfer of rights, buy-out clauses and the
lack of possibility to terminate contracts. Some stakeholders
are of the opinion that rules at national level do not suffice
to improve their situation and that action at EU level is
necessary.

In particular if you arean author/performer:] What is the best
mechanism (or combination of mechanisms) to ensure that you
receive an adequate remuneration for the exploitation of your
works and performances?

[Open question]

Le meilleur mécanisme est celui du respect de la liberté
contractuelle.Le Code de la Propriété Intellectuelle fixe déjà
les règles nécessaires à l’équilibre de celle-ci. La majorité
des droits des auteurs et compositeurs sont par ailleurs, dans
le domaine musical, gérée par la SACEM où les auteurs,
compositeurs représentent les 2/3 des administrateurs et des
droits de vote. A la Seam, les auteurs et les compositeurs ont
aussi leur place au sein du Conseil d’Administration et de
l’Assemblée Générale et par ailleurs la société est contrôlée
par le Ministère de la Culture et la Cour des comptes afin que
les équilibres soient toujours préservés.

Is there a need to act at the EU level (for instance to prohibit
certain clauses in contracts)?

YES–Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

…XNO–Please explainwhy

Il n’y aaucun besoind’unelégislation européenne spécifique afin
decensurerdesclauses contractuelles approuvées et confirmées
par ailleurs dans leslégislations nationales.

Une harmonisation des contrats au niveau européen n’est pas
souhaitable. Il est important de respecter la liberté
contractuelle et les traditions juridiques différentes de
chaque pays.

…………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO OPINION

Ifyou consider that the current rules are not effective, what
would you suggest to addresstheshortcomingsyou identify?

[Open question]

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

VIRespectforrights

Directive 2004/48/EE47

Directive 2004/48/EC of the European Parliament and of the
Council of 29 April 2004 on the enforcement of intellectual
property rights.

provides for a harmonised framework for the civil enforcement of
intellectual property rights, including copyright and related
rights. The Commission has consulted broadly on this text48

You will find more information on the following
website:http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/iprenforcement/directive/index_en.htm

. Concerns have been raised as to whether some of its provisions
are still fit to ensure a proper respect for copyright in the
digital age. On the one hand, the current measures seem to be
insufficient to deal with the new challenges brought by the
dissemination of digital content on the internet; on the other
hand, there are concerns about the current balance between
enforcement of copyright and the protection of fundamental
rights, in particular the right for a private life and data
protection. While it cannot be contested that enforcement
measures should always be available in case of infringement of
copyright, measures could be proposed to strengthen respect for
copyright when the infringed content is used for a commercial
purpose49

For example when the infringing content is offered on a website
which gets advertising revenues that depend on the volume of
traffic.

. One means to do this could be to clarify the role of
intermediaries in the IP infrastructure50

This clarification should not affect the liability regime of
intermediary service providers established by Directive
2000/31/EC on electronic commerce, which will remain unchanged.

. At the same time,there could beclarification of the
safeguardsforrespect of private life and data protection for
private users.

Shouldthe civil enforcement system in the EU be rendered more
efficient for infringements of copyright committed with a
commercial purpose?

X YES – Please explain

Le renforcement de l’application des droits en matière civile
devraiten effetêtre plus efficace en cas de violation des
droits, pour le respect des droits des créateurs.

Tout d’abord, il n’est pas question d’opérer une distinction
entre contrefaçon à but commercial ou non. De nombreuses études
récentes ont pu démontrer que la nature économique de tout acte
sur le web avait un but (visible ou non) de captation de
valeur.Même s’il peut sembler y avoir gratuité pour
l’internaute, souvent le profit est dissimulé sous la forme
par exemple de la récolte des données personnelles qui est
d’une grande richesse pour les publicitaires par exemple.De
plus, même si ce n’était pas le cas, ce type de violation
entraînerait toujours des conséquences commerciales étant
donné leurs effets de concurrence déloyale vis-à-vis de ceux
qui respectent la loi.

Par ailleurs, il est maintenant devenu indispensable de modifier
la législation européenne et particulièrement la Directive
Commerce électronique de 2000. En effet, les vraies barrières à
la création d’un marché européen des contenus numériques ne
proviennent pas de niveaux de protection différents selon les
pays mais plutôt du piratage des œuvres, empêchant
ledéveloppement des offres légales et leur rentabilité. Or,
cette lutte doit passer irrévocablement par
uneresponsabilisation des intermédiairestechniques. Or, la
Directive Commerce électronique de 2000, directive
transversale, consacre l’irresponsabilité de ceux-ci s’ils ont
un rôle passif.Or, cela revient à« écoper un bateau qui coule
avec une petite cuillère »..L’ayant droita la charge de
surveiller le web et doit notifier chaque contenu
illicite.Dansle meilleur des cas, l’intermédiaire technique ou
l’hébergeur va accepter sur notificationde l’ayantdroit de
supprimer le contenu illicite qui sera de nouveau disponible
quelques minutes plus tard.Or, ces prestataires ne sont pas de
simples intermédiaires, il tirent profit de cette situation de
non droit et captent à leur profit la valeur produite par ces
mises à disposition sans avoir à verser aucun droit et créent
une distorsion de concurrence envers le diffuseur traditionnel
qui, lui, ne se cache pas derrière le statut bien pratique
d’intermédiaire technique et verse des droits d’auteur aux
créateurs.

Ainsi, pour qu’il y ait un véritable respect de la loi et des
droits, cette réforme estnécessaire et il est étonnant que la
Commission l’écarte d’emblée(cf note 80 du document envoyé par
la Commission).

NO–Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO OPINION

In particular,isthe current legal framework clear enough to
allow forsufficient involvement of intermediaries (such as
Internet service providers, advertising brokers, payment
service providers, domain name registrars, etc.) in inhibiting
online copyright infringements with a commercial purpose? If
not, whatmeasureswould be useful to foster the cooperation of
intermediaries?

[Open question]

Non, comme nous l’avons expliquéprécédemment, le cadre juridique
existant n’est pas suffisant et étant donnépar exemplel’ampleur
maintenant établie des sites agrégateurs de liens renvoyant à
des contenus illicitesil est devenu indispensable de mettre en
place un système de responsabilisation des intermédiaires
techniques (cf réponse précédente). Il serait aussi nécessaire
que des actions pédagogiques soient menées notamment envers les
jeunes pour qui unacte illégal n’a aucune signification.

Does the current civil enforcement framework ensure that the
right balance is achieved between the right to have one’s
copyright respected and other rights such as the
protectionofprivate life and protection of personal data?

XYES – Please explain

La cadre juridique existant respecte le nécessaire équilibre
entre respect des droits des créateurs et protection des
données personnelles. Les législations nationales organisent
un cadre contraignant et nécessaire pour le relevé de ces
données avec contrôle du juge.

La Commission devrait plutôt s’interroger sur les pratiques de
certains opérateurs, intermédiaires techniques ou réseaux
sociaux qui collectent un nombre effarant de
donnéespersonnelles sur les consommateurs de manière détournée
sans que souvent l’internaute le sache même et ceci sans aucun
contrôle judiciaire et en tout impunité.

NO – Please explain

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………….

NO OPINION

VIIA single EU Copyright Title

The idea ofestablishing aunifiedEU CopyrightTitlehas been
presentin the copyright debate for quite some time now,
although views as to the merits and the feasibility of such an
objective are divided. A unified EU Copyright Title would
totally harmonise the area of copyright law in the EU and
replace national laws. There would then be a single EU title
instead of a bundle of national rights. Some see this as the
only manner in which a truly Single Market for content
protected by copyright can be ensured, while others believe
that the same objective can better be achieved by establishing
a higher level of harmonisation while allowing for a certain
degree of flexibility and specificity in Member States’ legal
systems.

Should the EU pursue the establishment of a single EU Copyright
Title, as a means of establishing a consistent framework for
rights and exceptions to copyright across the EU, as well as a
single framework for enforcement?

YES

XNO

Les vraies barrières à la création d’une harmonisation des
législations nationales proviennentnotamment dans le domaine
de l’environnement numériquedu piratage des œuvres,
empêchantnotammentle développement des offres légales et
larentabilitédu système des licences contractuelles.Or,
l’Europe ne semble pas du tout se diriger vers un
renforcement des droits des créateurs mais plutôt vers une
défense des opérateurs ou intermédiaires techniques. Dans ces
conditions, chaque pays doit pouvoir rester libre de sa
politique en matière de droit d’auteuret préserver sa diversité
culturellecar l’harmonisation n’irait pas dans un sens
protecteur des droits mais plutôt vers un nivellement de la
protection des ayants droit vers le bas.

NO OPINION

Should this be the next step in the development of copyright in
the EU? Does the current level of difference among the Member
State legislation mean that this is a longer term project?

[Open question]

cf réponse précédente.

VIIIOther issues

The above questionnaire aims to provide a comprehensive
consultation on the most important matters relating to the
current EU legal framework for copyright. Should any
importantmatters have been omitted, we would appreciate if you
could bring them to our attention, so they can be properly
addressed in the future.

Are there any other important matters related to the EU legal
framework forcopyright?Pleaseexplainandindicatehow such matters
should be addressed.

[Open question)

Les vraies barrières à la création d’une harmonisation des
législations nationales proviennentnotamment dans le domaine
de l’environnement numériquedu piratage des œuvres,
empêchantnotammentle développement des offres légales et
larentabilitédu système des licences contractuelles. Orla
Commission a clairement écarté ce qui aurait pu aller vers une
amélioration de la situation à savoir la réouverture de la
Directive Commerceélectronique de 2000et la responsabilisation
des intermédiaires techniques. Il semble donc très difficile de
ne pas constater que la situation est bloquée car toute action
vers un soutien à l’offre légale et à la pédagogie serait
limitée dans ces conditions. Aussi il nous semble que ce
questionnaire n’est pas complet et que cette cruelle absence
empêche un système harmonieux et harmonisé de se développer
avec un respect nécessaire des équilibres.

