


Public Consultationonthe review oftheEUcopyright rules

Contents

Introduction

2

Context of the consultation

2

How to submit replies to this questionnaire

3

Confidentiality3

Rights and the functioning of the Single Market

7

A. Why is it not possible to access many online content services
from anywhere in Europe?

7

BIs there a need for more clarityas regards the scope of what
needs to be authorised (or not) in digital transmissions?

10

L

The act of "making available"

10

2,

Two rights involved in a single act of exploitation

11

3,

Linking and browsing

12

4,

Download to own digital content

13

Registration of works and other subject matter-is it a good
idea?

14

How to improve the use and interoperability of identifiers

15

Term of protection-is it appropriate?

15

Limitations and exceptions in the Single Market

16

A. Access to content in libraries and archives19

Ä»

Preservation and archiving

19

2.

Off-premises access to library collections

20

3.

E-lending

21

4.

Mass digitisation

22

Teaching23

Research25

Disabilities25

Text and data mining

27

User-generated content

28

Private copying and reprography

31

Fair remuneration of authors and performers

33

Respect for rights

34

A singleEUCopyright Title

36

Other issues

36

I.Introduction

Context of the consultation

Over the last two decades,digital technology and the Internet
have reshaped the ways in which content is created,
distributed, and accessed. New opportunities have materialised
for those that create and produce content (e.g. a film, a
novel, a song), for new and existing distribution platforms,
for institutions such as libraries, for activities such as

research and for citizens who now expect to be able to access
content-for information, education or entertainment
purposes-regardless of geographical borders.

This new environment also presents challenges. One of them is
for the market to continue to adapt to new forms of
distribution and use. Another one is for the legislator to
ensure that the system of rights, limitations to rights and
enforcement remains appropriate and is adapted to the new
environment. This consultation focuses on the second of these
challenges: ensuring that theEUcopyright regulatory framework
stays fit for purpose in the digital environment to support
creation and innovation, tap the full potential of theSingle
Market, foster growth and investment in our economy and promote
cultural diversity.

In its "Communication on Content in the Digital Single
Market"1the Commission set out two parallel tracks of action:
ontheone hand, to complete its on-going effort to review

23

and to modernisetheEU copyright legislative framework with a
view to a decision in2014on whether to table legislative reform
proposals, and on the other, to facilitate practical
industry-led solutions through the stakeholder dialogue
"Licences for Europe" on issues on which rapid progress was
deemed necessary and possible.

The "Licences for Europe" process has been finalised now4. The
Commission welcomes the practical solutions stakeholders
haveputforward in this context and will monitor their progress.
Pledges have been made by stakeholders in all four Working
Groups (cross border portability of services, user-generated
content, audiovisual and film heritage and text and data
mining). Taken together, the Commission expects these pledges
to be a further step in making the user environment easier in
many different situations. The Commission also takes note of
the fact that two groups - user-generated content and text and
data mining - did not reach consensus among participating
stakeholders on eithertheproblems to be addressed or on the
results. The discussions and results of "Licences for Europe"
will be also taken into account in the context of the review
ofthelegislative framework.

As part of the review process,the Commission is now launching a
public consultation on issues identified in the Communication
on Content in the Digital Single Market, i.e.:"territoriality
in the Internal Market,harmonisation,limitations and exceptions
to copyright in the digital age; fragmentation of theEUcopyright
market; and how to improve the effectiveness and efficiency of
enforcement while underpinning its legitimacyin the wider
context of copyright reform".As highlighted in the
October2013European

Council Conclusions5"Providing digital services and content
across the single market requires the establishment of a
copyright regime for the digital age. The Commission will
therefore complete its on-going review of theEUcopyright
framework in spring2014.It is important tomodernise Europe's
copyright regime and facilitate licensing, while ensuring a
high level protection of intellectual property rights and
taking into account cultural diversity".

This consultation builds on previous consultations and public
hearings, in particular those

on the "Green Paper on copyright in the knowledge economy"6, the
"Green Paper on the

78 online distribution of audiovisual works" and "Content
Online".These consultations

provided valuable feedback from stakeholders on a number of
questions, on issues as

diverse as the territoriality of copyright and possible ways to
overcome territoriality,

exceptions related to the online dissemination of knowledge, and
rightholders'

remuneration, particularly in the audiovisual sector. Views were
expressed by

stakeholders representing all stages in the value chain,
including right holders,

distributors, consumers, and academics. The questions elicited
widely diverging views on

the best way to proceed. The"Green Paper on Copyright in the
Knowledge Economy"

was followed up by a Communication. The replies to the "Green
Paper on the online

distribution of audiovisual works" have fed into subsequent
discussions on the Collective

Rights Management Directiveand into the current review process.

How to submit replies to this questionnaire

You are kindly asked to send your repliesby5February2014as a
word orpdfdocument to the following e-mail address of DG
Internal Market and
Services:markt-copyright-consultation@ec.europa.eu.Please note
that replies sent after that date will not be taken into
account.

This consultation is addressed to different categories of
stakeholders. Totheextent possible, the questions indicate the
category/ies of respondents most likely to be concerned by them
(annotation in brackets, before the actual question).
Respondents should nevertheless feel free to reply to any/all
ofthequestions. Also, please note that, apart from the question
concerningtheidentification of the respondent, none
ofthequestions is obligatory. Replies containing answers only
to part ofthequestions will be also accepted.

You are requested to provide your answers directlywithin this
consultation document. For the "Yes/No/No opinion" questions
please put the selected answer inboldandunderlineit so it is
easy for us to see your selection.

In your answers to the questions, you are invited to refer to
the situation inEUMemberStates.Youare also invited in
particular to indicate, where relevant, what would be the
impact of options you put forward in terms of costs,
opportunities and revenues.

The public consultation is available in English. Responses may,
however, be sent in any of the24official languages of theEU.

Confidentiality

The contributions received in this round of consultation as well
as a summary report presenting the responses in a statistical
and aggregated form will be published onthe

websiteofDG MARKT.

Please note that all contributions received will be published
together withtheidentity ofthe contributor, unless the
contributor objects to the publication of their personal data
on the grounds that such publication would harm his or her
legitimate interests. In this case, the contribution will be
published in anonymous form upon the contributor's explicit
request. Otherwise the contribution will not be published nor
will its content be reflected inthesummary report.

Please read ourPrivacy statement.

Please identify yourself:

Name:

In the interests of transparency,organisations (including, for
example,NGOs,trade associations and commercial enterprises) are
invited to provide the public with relevant information about
themselves by registering intheInterest Representative Register
and subscribing to its Code ofConduct.

0If you are a Registered organisation, please indicate your
Register ID number below. Your contribution will then be
considered as representing the views of your organisation.

0If your organisation is not registered, you have the
opportunity toregister now. Responses from organisations not
registered will be published separately.

If you would like to submit your reply on an anonymous basis
please indicate itbelow by underlining the following answer:

!Yes, I would like to submit my reply on ananonymous basis

Type of respondent(Pleaseunderlinethe appropriate):

!End user/consumer(e.g. internet user, reader, subscriber to
music or audiovisualservice, researcher,
student)ORRepresentative of end users/consumers

for the purposes of this questionnaire normally referred to in
questions as"end users/consumers"

!Institutional user(e.g. school, university, research centre,
library, archive)OR Representative of institutional users

for the purposes of this questionnaire normally referred to in
questions as"institutional users"

!Author/Performer OR Representative of authors/performers

!Publisher/Producer/Broadcaster OR Representative of
publishers/producers/ broadcasters

the two above categoriesare, for the purposes of this
questionnaire, normallyreferred to in questions as"right
holders"

!Intermediary/Distributor/Other service provider(e.g. online
music or audiovisual service, games platform, social media,
search engine, ICT industry)

OR Representative of intermediaries/distributors/other service
providers

for the purposes of this questionnaire normally referred to in
questions as

"service providers"

0Collective Management Organisation

0Publicauthority

0MemberStateBRD

0Other(Please explain):

I.Rights and the functioning of the Single Market

Why is it not possible to access many online content services
from anywhere in Europe?

[The territorial scope of the rights involved in digital
transmissions and the segmentation of the market through
licensing agreements]

Holders of copyright and related rights-e.g. writers, singers,
musicians-do not enjoy a single protection in theEU.Instead,
they are protected on the basis of a bundle of national rights
in each Member State. Those rights have been largely harmonised
by the existing EU Directives. However, differences remain and
the geographical scope oftherights is limited to the territory
of the Member State granting them. Copyright is thus
territorial inthesense that rights are acquired and enforced on
a country-by-country basis

9

under national law .

The dissemination of copyright-protected content on the
Internet-e.g. by a music streaming service, or by an online
e-book seller-therefore requires, in principle, an

authorisation for each national territory in which the content
is communicated to thepublic.Rightholders are, of course, in a
position to grant a multi-territorial or pan- European licence,
such that content services can be provided in several Member
States and across borders. A number of steps have been taken
atEUlevel to facilitatemultiÂ­territoriallicences: the proposal
for a Directive on Collective Rights Management10should
significantly facilitatethedelivery of multi-territorial
licences in musical works

11  12

for online services;the structured stakeholder dialogue
"Licences for Europe" and

13

market-led developments such astheon-going work in the Linked
Content Coalition .

"Licences for Europe" addressed in particular the specific issue
of cross-border portability, i.e. the ability of consumers
having subscribed to online services in their Member State
tokeep accessing them when travelling temporarily to other
Member States. As a result, representatives of the audio-visual
sector issued a joint statement affirming their commitment to
continue working towards the further development of

cross-border portability14.

Despite progress, there are continued problems with the
cross-border provision of, and access to, services. These
problems are most obvious to consumers wanting to access
services that are made available in Member States other than
the one in which they live. Not all online services are
available in all Member States and consumers face problems when
trying to access such services across borders. In some
instances, even ifthe"same" service is available in all Member
States, consumers cannot access the service across borders
(they can only access their "national" service, and if they try
to access the "same" service in another Member State they are
redirected to the one designated for their country of
residence).

This situation may in part stem from the territoriality of
rights and difficulties associated with the clearing of rights
in different territories. Contractual clauses in licensing
agreements between right holders and distributors and/or
between distributors and end usersmay also be at the origin of
some of the problems (denial of access, redirection).

The main issue at stake here is, therefore, whether further
measures (legislative ornonÂ­legislative,including market-led
solutions) need to be taken at EU level inthemedium

term15to increase the cross-border availability of content
services in the Single Market, while ensuring an adequate level
of protection for right holders.

1.[Inparticular if you are an end user/consumer:]Have you faced
problems when trying to access online services in anEUMember
State other than the one in which you live?

!YES-Please provide examples indicating the Member State,the
sector and thetype of content concerned(e.g.premium content
such as certainfilms and TV series, audio-visual content in
general,music, e-books,magazines,_journals and

newspapers, games, applications and other software)

Videos auf Youtube

!NO

0NO OPINION

1.[In particular if you are aservice provider:]Have you faced
problems when seeking to provideonlineservices across borders
intheEU?

0YES-Please explain whether such problems, in your experience,
are related to copyright or to other issues (e.g. business
decisions relating tothe cost of providing services across
borders, compliance with other laws such as consumer
protection)? Please provide examples indicating the Member
State, the sector and the type of content concerned (e.g.
premium content such as certain films and TV series,
audio-visual content in general, music, e-books, magazines,
journals and newspapers, games, applications and other
software).

!NO

0NO OPINION

1.[In particular if you are a right holder or a collective
management organisation:]How often are you asked to grant
multi-territorial licences? Please indicate, if
possible,thenumber of requests per year and provide examples
indicatingtheMember State, the sector and the type of content
concerned.

[Open question]

1.If you have identified problems in the answers to any of the
questions aboveâwhat would be the best way to tackle them?

[Open question]

1.[In particular if you are a right holder or a collective
management organisation:]Are there reasons why, even incases
where you hold all the necessary rights for all the territories
in question, you would still find it necessary or justified to
impose territorial restrictions on a service provider (in
order, for instance, to ensure that access to certain content
isnot possible in certain European countries)?

0YES-Please explain by giving examples

0NO

0NO OPINION

1.[In particular if you are e.g. a broadcaster or a service
provider:]Are there reasons why, evenin cases where you have
acquired all the necessary rights for all the territories in
question, you would still find it necessary or justified to
impose territorial restrictions ontheservice recipient (in
order forinstance,to redirecttheconsumer to adifferent website
thanthe onehe is trying toaccess)?

0YES-Please explain by giving examples

!NO

! NO OPINION

1.Do you think that further measures (legislative or
non-legislative, including market-led solutions) are needed
atEUlevel to increase the cross-borderavailability of content
services in the Single Market, while ensuring an adequate level
of protection for right holders?

!YES-Please explain

0NO-Please explain

!NO OPINION

Is there a need for more clarity as regards the scope of what
needs to be authorised (or not) in digital transmissions?

[The definition of the rights involved in digital transmissions]

TheEUframework for the protection of copyright and related
rights in the digital

environment is largely established by Directive 2001/29/EC16on
theharmonisationof certain aspects of copyright and related
rights in the information society. OtherEUdirectives in this
field that are relevant in the online environment are those
relating to the

protection of software17and databases18.

Directive 2001/29/EC harmonises the rights of authors and
neighbouring rightholders

which are essential for thetransmission of digital copies of
works (e.g. an e-book) and other protected subject matter (e.g.
a record in a MP3 format) over the internet or similar digital
networks.

The most relevant rights for digital transmissions are the
reproduction right, i.e.the right

20

to authorise or prohibitthemaking of copies , (notably relevant
at the start ofthetransmission-e.g. the uploading of a digital
copy of a work to a server in view of making it available-and
at the users' end-e.g. when a user downloadsa digital copy of a
work) and the communication to the public/making available
right, i.e. the rights to

21

authorise or prohibitthedissemination of the works in digital
networks . These rights are intrinsically linked in digital
transmissions and bothneed to be cleared.

The act of "making available"

Directive 2001/29/EC specifies neitherwhatis covered by the
making available right (e.g. the upload, the accessibility by
the public, the actual reception by the public) norwheretheact
of "making available" takes place. This does not raise
questions if the act is limited to a single territory.
Questions arise however when the transmission covers several
territories and rights need to be cleared (does the act of
"making available" happen in the country of the upload only? in
each of the countries where the content is potentially
accessible? in each of the countries where the content is
effectively accessed?). The most recent case law of the Court
of Justice of the European Union (CJEU)suggests that a relevant
criterion is the "targeting" of a certain Member State's 22

public . According to this approachthecopyright-relevant act
(which has to be licensed) occurs at least in those countries
which are "targeted" by the online service provider. A service
provider "targets" a group of customers residing in a specific
country when it directs its activity to that group, e.g. via
advertisement, promotions, a language or a currency
specifically targeted at that group.

1.Is the scope of the "making available"right in cross-border
situationsâ i.e.when content is disseminated across
bordersâsufficiently clear?

!YES

!NO-Please explain how this could be clarified and what type of
clarification would be required (e.g.as in "targeting" approach
explained above, as in "country of origin" 23

approach )

!NO OPINION

1.[In particular if you are a right holder:]Could a
clarification of the territorial scope of the "making
available"right have an effect on the recognitionof your rights
(e.g. whether you are considered to be an author or not, whether
you are considered to have transferred your rights or not), on
your remuneration, or on

the enforcement of rights (including the availability of
injunctiverelieÃ4)?!YES-Please explain how such potential
effects could be addressed

! NO

!NO OPINION

Two rights involved in a single act of exploitation

Each act of transmission in digital networks entails (in the
current state of technology and law) several reproductions.
This means that there are two rights that apply to digital
transmissions: the reproduction right and the making available
right. This may complicate the licensing of works for online
use notably whenthe two rights are held by different
persons/entities.

1.[Inparticular if you a service provider or a right
holder:]Does the application of two rights to a single act of
economic exploitation in the online environment (e.g. a
download) create problemsfor you?

!YES-Please explain what type of measures would be needed in
order to address such problems (e.g. facilitation of joint
licences when the rights are in different hands, legislation to
achieve the "bundling of rights")

! NO

0NO OPINION

Linkingand browsing

Hyperlinks are references to data that lead a user from one
location in the Internet to another. They are indispensable for
the functioning of the Internet as a network. Several

25

cases are pending beforetheCJEU in which the questionhas been
raised whethertheprovision of a clickable link constitutes an
act of communication to the public/making available to the
public subject to the authorisation of the rightholder.

A user browsing the internet (e.g. viewing a web-page) regularly
creates temporary copies of works and other subject-matter
protected under copyright on the screen and in

26

the 'cache' memory of his computer. A question has been referred
totheCJEU as to whether such copies are always covered by the
mandatory exceptionfor temporary acts of reproduction provided
for in Article5(1)of Directive 2001/29/EC.

1.Should the provision of a hyperlink leading to a work or other
subject matter protected under copyright, either in general or
under specific circumstances, be subject to the authorisation
of the rightholder?

0YES-Please explain whether you consider this to be the case in
general, or under specific circumstances, and why

0NO-Please explain whether you consider this to be the case in
general,or under specific circumstances,and why(e.g. because it
does not amount to an act of communication to the public-or to a
new public,or because it should be covered by a copyright
exception)

generell.

0NO OPINION

1.Should the viewingof a web-page where this implies the
temporary reproduction of a work or other subject matter
protected under copyright on the

screen and in the cache memory of the user's computer, either in
general or under specific circumstances, be subject to the
authorisation of therightholder?

!YES-Please explain whether you consider this to be the case in
general, or under specific circumstances, and why

!NO-Please explain whether you consider this to be the case in
general,or under specific circumstances,and why(e.g. because it
is or should be covered by a copyright exception)

generell.

!NO OPINION

Download to own digital content

Digital content is increasingly being bought via digital
transmission (e.g. download to own). Questionsarise as to the
possibility for users to dispose of the files they buy in this
manner (e.g. by selling them or by giving them as a gift). The
principle ofEUexhaustion of the distribution right applies in
the case of the distribution of physical copies (e.g. when a
tangible article such as a CD or a book, etc. is sold, the
right holder cannot

27

prevent the further distribution of that tangible article).The
issue that arises here is whether this principle can also be
applied in the case of an act of transmission equivalent

28

in its effect to distribution (i.e. where the buyer acquires the
property of the copy).This raises difficult questions,notably
relating to the practical application of such an approach (how
to avoid re-sellers keeping and using a copy of a work after
they have "re-sold" it-this is often referred to as the
"forward and delete" question) as well as to the economic
implications of the creation of a second-hand market of copies
of perfect quality that never deteriorate (in contrast to the
second-hand market for physical goods).

1.[Inparticular if you are an end user/consumer:]Have you faced
restrictions when trying to resell digital files that you have
purchased(e.g.mp3 file,eÂ­book)?

!YES-Please explain by giving examples

!NO

!NO OPINION

1.[In particular if you are a right holder or a service
provider:] What would be the consequencesof providing a legal
framework enabling the resale of previously purchased digital
content? Please specify per market (type of content) concerned.

[Open question]

Registration of works and other subject matter-is it a good
idea?

Registration is not often discussed in copyright in theEUas the
existing international treaties in the area prohibit
formalities as a condition for the protection and exercise of

29

rights. However, this prohibition is not absolute.Moreover a
system ofregistration does not need to be made compulsory or
constitute a precondition fortheprotection and exercise of
rights. With a longer term of protection and with the increased
opportunities that digital technology provides for the use of
content (including older works and works that otherwise would
not have been disseminated), the advantages and disadvantages
of a

30

system of registration are increasingly being considered .

1.Would the creation of a registration system atEUlevel help in
the identification and licensing of works and other subject
matter?

!YES

!NO

!NO OPINION

1.What would be the possible advantages of such a system?

[Open question]

1.What would be the possible disadvantages of such a
system?[Open question]

1.What incentives for registration by rightholders could be
envisaged?[Open question]

How to improve the use and interoperability of identifiers

There are many private databasesof works and other subject
matter held by producers, collective management organisations,
and institutions such as libraries, which are based to a
greater or lesser extent on the use of (more or less)
interoperable, internationally agreed 'identifiers'.
Identifiers can be compared to a reference number embedded in a

31

work, are specific to the sector in which they have been
developed,and identify, variously, the work itself, the owner
or the contributor to a work or other subject matter. There are
notable examples of where industry is undertaking actions to
improve the

32

interoperability of such identifiers and databases. The Global
Repertoire Database should, once operational, provide a single
source of information ontheownership and

33

control of musical works worldwide. The Linked Content Coalition
was established to

develop building blocks for the expression and management of
rights and licensing across all content and media types. It
includes the development of a Rights Reference Model
(RRM)-acomprehensive data model for all types of rights in all
types of content. The 34

UK Copyright Hub is seeking to take such identification systems
a step further, and to create a linked platform, enabling
automated licensing across different sectors.

1.What should be the role of theEUin promoting the adoption of
identifiers inthecontent sector,andin
promotingthedevelopmentandinteroperability of rights ownership
and permissions databases?

[Open question]

Term of protection-is it appropriate?

Works and other subject matter are protected under copyright for
a limited period of time. After the term of protection has
expired, a work falls into the public domain and can be freely
used by anyone (in accordance with the applicable national
rules on moral rights).

35

The Berne Convention requires a minimum term of protection
of50years after the death of the author. TheEUrules extend this
term of protection to70years after the death of the author (as
do many other countries, e.g. the US).

With regard to performers inthemusic sector and phonogram
producers,theterm provided for in the EU rules also extend 20
years beyond what is mandated in international agreements,
providing for a term of protection of70years after the first
publication. Performers and producers intheaudio-visual sector,
however, do not benefit from such an extended term of
protection.

1.^re the currentterms of copyright protection still appropriate
in the digital environment?

!YES-Please explain

!NO-Please explain if they should be longer or shorter

!NO OPINION

I.Limitations and exceptions in the Single Market

Limitations and exceptionsto copyright and related rights enable
the use of works and other protected subject-matter, without
obtaining authorisation from the rightholders, for certain
purposes and to a certain extent (for instance the use for
illustration purposes of an extract from a novel by a teacher
in a literature class). AtEUlevel they are established

36

in a number of copyright directives, most notably Directive
2001/29/EC.

Exceptions and limitations inthenational and EU copyright laws
have to respect37

international law . In accordance with international
obligations,theEU acquis requires that limitations and
exceptions can only be applied in certain special cases which
do not conflict with a normal exploitation of the work or other
subject matter and do not unreasonably prejudice the legitimate
interest oftherightholders.

Whereasthecatalogue of limitations and exceptions included in EU
law is exhaustive (no

38

other exceptions can be applied to the rights harmonised
atEUlevel),these limitations

39

and exceptions are often optional,in the sense that Member
States are free to reflect in national legislation as many or
as few of them as they wish. Moreover, the formulation of
certain of the limitations and exceptions is general enough to
give significant flexibility to the Member States as to how,
and to what extent, to implement them (if they decide to do
so). Finally, it is worth noting that not all of the
limitations and exceptions included in the EU legal framework
for copyright are of equivalent significance in policy terms
and in terms of their potential effect on the functioning of
the Single Market.

In addition, in the same mannerthat the definition of the rights
is territorial (i.e. has an effect only within the territory of
the Member State), the definition of the limitations and
exceptions totherights is territorial too (so an act that is
covered by an exception in a Member State "A" may still require
the authorisation of the rightholder once we move to

the Member State "B")40

The cross-border effect of limitations and exceptions also
raises the question of fair compensation of rightholders. In
some instances, Member States are obliged to compensate
rightholders for the harm inflicted on them by a limitation or
exception to

their rights. In other instances Member States are not obliged,
but may decide, to provide for such compensation. If a
limitation or exception triggering amechanism of fair
compensation were to be given cross-border effect (e.g. the
books are used for illustration in an online course given by an
university in a Member State "A" and the students are in a
Member State "B") then there would also be a need to clarify
which national law should determine the level of that
compensation and who should pay it.

Finally, the question of flexibility and adaptability is being
raised: what is the best mechanism to ensure that theEUand
Member States' regulatory frameworksadapt when necessary
(either to clarify that certain uses are covered by an
exception or to confirm that for certain uses the authorisation
of rightholders is required)? The main question here is whether
a greater degree of flexibility can be introduced in theEUand
Member States regulatory framework while ensuringtherequired
legal certainty, including forthefunctioning of the Single
Market, and respecting theEU'sinternational obligations.

1.^re there problemsarising from the fact that mostlimitations
and exceptions provided in theEUcopyright directives are
optional for the Member States?

0YES-Please explain by referring to specific cases

0NO-Please explain

0NO OPINION

1.Shouldsome/all of the exceptions bemade mandatory and, if so,
is there a need for a higher level ofharmonisationof such
exceptions?

0YES-Please explain by referring to specific cases

!NO-Please explain

!NO OPINION

1.Should any new limitations andexceptions be added to or
removed from the existing catalogue? Please explain by
referring to specific cases.

[Open question]

1.Independently from the questions above, is there a need to
provide for a greater degree of flexibility in theEUregulatory
framework for limitations and exceptions?

!YES-Please explain why

! NO - Please explain why

!NO OPINION

1.If yes, what would be the best approach to provide for
flexibility? (e.g. interpretation by national courts and the
ECJ, periodic revisions of the

directives,interpretationsby the Commission, built-in
flexibility, e.g. in the form of a fair-use or fair dealing
provision/open norm, etc.)? Please explain indicating what
would be the relative advantages and disadvantages of such an
approach as wellas its possible effects onthefunctioning
oftheInternal Market.

[Open question]

1.Does the territoriality of limitations and exceptions, in your
experience, constitute aproblem?

!YES-Please explain why and specify which exceptions you are
referringto

!NO-Please explain why and specify which exceptions you are
referring to

!NO OPINION

1.In the eventthat limitations and exceptionsestablished at
national level were to have cross-border effect, how should the
question of "fair compensation"be addressed, when such
compensation is part of the exception? (e.g. who pays whom,
where?)

[Open question]

Accesstocontentin libraries and archives

Directive 2001/29/EC enables Member States to reflect in their
national law a range of limitations and exceptions
forthebenefit of publicly accessible libraries, educational
establishments and museums, as well as archives. Ifimplemented,
these exceptions allow

41

acts of preservation and archiving and enable on-site
consultation of the works and

42

other subject matter in the collections of such institutions.The
public lending (under anexception or limitation) by these
establishments of physical copies of works and other

43

subject matter is governed by the Rental and Lending Directive.

Questions arise as to whetherthe current framework continues to
achieve the objectives envisaged or whether it needs to be
clarified or updated to cover use in digital networks. At the
same time, questions arise as totheeffect of such a possible
expansion onthenormal exploitationof works and other subject
matter and as to the prejudice this may cause to rightholders.
The role of licensing and possible framework agreements between
different stakeholders also needs to be considered here.

Preservation and archiving

The preservation ofthecopies of works or other subject-matter
held inthecollections of cultural establishments (e.g. books,
records, or films)-the restoration or replacement of works, the
copying of fragile works - may involve the creation of another
copy/ies of these works or other subject matter. Most Member
States provide for an exception in their national laws allowing
for the making of such preservation copies. The scope
oftheexception differs from Member State to Member State (as
regards the type of beneficiary establishments, the types of
works/subject-matter covered by the exception, the mode of
copying and the number of reproductions that a beneficiary
establishment may make). Also, the current legal status of new
types of preservation activities (e.g. harvesting and archiving
publicly available web content) is often uncertain.

1.(a)[In particular if you are an institutional user:]Have you
experienced specific problems when trying to use an exception
to preserve and archive specific works or other subject matter
in your collection?

(b)[In particular if you are a right holder:]Have you
experienced problems with the use by libraries, educational
establishments, museum or archives ofthepreservation exception?

0YES-Please explain, by Member State, sector, and the type of
use in question.

!NO

!NO OPINION

1.If there are problems, how would they best be solved?[Open
question]

1.If your view is that a legislative solution is needed, what
would be its main elements?Which activities of the beneficiary
institutions should be covered and under which conditions?

[Open question]

1.If your view is that a different solution is needed, what
would it be?[Open question]

Off-premises access to library collections

Directive 2001/29/EC provides an exception for the consultation
of works and other subject-matter (consulting an e-book,
watching a documentary) via dedicated terminals on the premises
of such establishments for the purpose of research and private
study. The online consultation of works and other
subject-matter remotely (i.e. when the library user is not on
the premises ofthelibrary) requires authorisation and is
generally addressed in agreements between
universities/libraries and publishers. Some argue that the law
rather than agreements should provide forthepossibilityto,and
the conditions for, granting

online access to collections.

1.(a)[In particular if you are an institutional user:]Have you
experienced specific problems when trying to negotiate
agreements with rights holders that enable you to provide
remote access, including across borders, to your collections
(or parts thereof) for purposes of researchandprivate study?

[In particular if you are an end user/consumer:]Have you
experienced specific problems when trying to consult, including
across borders, works and other subject- matter held in the
collections of institutions such as universities and national
libraries when you are not on the premises of the institutions
in question?

[In particular if you are a right holder:]Have you negotiated
agreements with institutional users that enable those
institutions to provide remote access, including across
borders, to the works or other subject-matter in their
collections, for purposesof research and private study?

[Open question]

1.If there are problems, how would they best be solved?[Open
question]

1.If your view is that a legislativesolution is needed, what
would be its main elements? Which activities of the beneficiary
institutions should be covered and under which conditions?

[Open question]

1.If your view is that a different solution is needed, what
would it be?[Open question]

E-lending

Traditionally, public libraries have loaned physical copies of
works (i.e. books, sometimes also CDs and DVDs) to their users.
Recent technological developments have made it technically
possible for libraries to provide users with temporary access
to digital content, such as e-books, music or films via
networks. Under the current legal framework, libraries need to
obtain the authorisation of the rights holders to organise such
e-lending activities. In various Member States, publishers and
libraries are currently experimenting with different business
models for the making available of works online, including
direct supply of e-books to libraries by publishers or bundling
by aggregators.

1.(a)[In particular if you are a library:]Have you experienced
specific problems when trying to negotiate agreements to enable
the electronic lending(eÂ­lending),including across borders, of
books or other materials held in your collection?

[In particular if you are an end user/consumer:]Have you
experienced specific problems when trying to borrow books or
other materials electronically (e-lending), including across
borders, from institutions such as public libraries?

[In particular if you are a right holder:]Have you negotiated
agreements with libraries to enable them to lend books or other
materials electronically, including across borders?

!YES-Please explain with specific examples

!NO

! NO OPINION

1.If there are problems, how would they best be solved?[Open
question]

The following two questions are relevant both to this point
(nÂ°3)and the previous one (n Â°2).

1.[Inparticular if you are an institutional user:]What
differences do you seein the management of physical and online
collections, including providing access to your subscribers?
What problems have you encountered?

[Open question]

1.[In particular if you are a right holder:]What difference do
you see betweenlibraries' traditional activities such as
on-premises consultation or public lending and activities such
as off-premises (online, at a distance) consultation and
e-lending? What problems have you encountered?

[Open question]

Mass digitisation

The term "mass digitisation" is normally used to refer to
efforts by institutions such as libraries and archives to
digitise (e.g. scan) the entire content or part of their
collections with an objective to preserve these collections
and, normally, to makethem available to the public. Examples
are efforts by libraries to digitise novels form the early part
ofthe

20thcentury or whole collections of pictures of historical
value. This matter has been partly addressed at theEUlevel by
the2011Memorandum ofUnderstanding (MoU) on key principles on
the digitisation and making available of out of commerce works
(i.e. works which are no longer found in the normal channels of
commerce), which is aiming to facilitate mass digitisation
efforts (for books and learned journals) on the basis of
licence agreements between libraries and similar cultural
institutions on the one hand and

the collecting societies representing authors and publishers on
the other.Provided therequired funding is ensured (digitisation
projects are extremely expensive), the result of this MoU should
be that books that are currently to be found only in the
archives of, for instance, libraries will be digitised and made
available online to everyone. The MoU is based on voluntary
licences (granted by Collective Management Organisations on the
basis of the mandates they receive from authors and publishers).
Some Member States may need to enact legislation to ensure the
largest possible effect of such licences (e.g. by establishing
in legislation apresumption of representation of a collecting
society or the

45

recognition of an "extended effect" to the licences granted).

1.[Inparticular if you are an institutionaluser, engaging or
wanting to engage in mass digitisation projects, a right
holder, a collective management organisation:]Would it be
necessary in your country to enact legislation to ensure that
the results of the2011MoU(i.e.the agreements concludedbetween
libraries and collecting societies) have a cross-border effect
so that out of commerce works can be accessed across theEU?

!YES-Please explain why and how it could best be achieved

!NO-Please explain

0NO OPINION

1.Would it benecessary to develop mechanisms, beyond those
already agreed for other types of content (e.g. for audio- or
audio-visual collections, broadcasters' archives)?

0YES-Please explain

!NO-Please explain

!NO OPINIONTeaching

46

Directive 2001/29/EC enables Member States to implement in their
national legislation limitations and exceptions forthepurpose of
illustration for non-commercial teaching. Such exceptions would
typically allow a teacher to use parts of or full works to
illustrate his course, e.g. by distributing copies of fragments
of a book or of newspaper articles in the classroom or by
showing protected content on a smart board without having to
obtain authorisation from the right holders. The open
formulation of this (optional) provision allows for rather
different implementation at Member States level. The
implementation of the exception differs from Member State to
Member State, with several Member States providing instead a
framework for the licensing of content for certain educational
uses. Some argue that the law should provide for better
possibilities for distance learning and study at home.

1.(a)[In particular if you are an end user/consumer or an
institutional user:]Have you experienced specific problems when
trying to use works orother subject- matter for illustration for
teaching, including across borders?

(b)[In particular if you are a right holder:]Have you
experienced specific problems resulting from the way in which
works or other subject-matter are used for illustration for
teaching, including across borders?

!YES-Please explain

!NO

!NO OPINION

1.If there are problems, how would they best be solved?[Open
question]

1.What mechanisms exist in themarket place to facilitate the use
of content for illustration for teaching purposes? How
successful are they?

[Open question]

1.If your view is that a legislativesolution is needed, what
would be its main elements? Which activities of the beneficiary
institutions should be covered and under what conditions?

[Open question]

1.If your view is that a different solution is needed, what
would it be?[Open question]

Research

Directive 2001/29/ECenables MemberStatesto choose whether to
implement in their national laws a limitation for the purpose
of non-commercial scientific research. The open formulation of
this(optional) provision allows for rather different
implementations at Member States level.

1.(a)[In particular if you are an end user/consumer or an
institutional user:]Have you experienced specific problems when
trying to use works or other subject matter in the context of
research projects/activities, including across borders?

(b)[In particular if you are a right holder:]Have you
experienced specific problems resulting from the way in which
works or other subject-matter are used inthe context of
research projects/activities, including across borders?

!YES-Please explain

!NO

! NO OPINION

1.If there are problems, how would they best be solved?[Open
question]

1.What mechanisms exist in the Member States to facilitate the
use ofcontent for research purposes? How successful are they?

[Open question]

Disabilities

Directive 2001/29/EC providesforanexception/limitation for the
benefit of people with a disability. The open formulation of
this (optional) provision allows for rather different
implementations at Member States level. AtEUand international
level projects have been launched to increase the accessibility
of works and other subject-matter for persons with disabilities
(notably by increasing the number of works published in special

49

formats and facilitating their distribution across the European
Union) .

The Marrakesh Treaty50has been adopted to facilitateaccess to
published works for persons who are blind, visually impaired,
or otherwise print disabled. The Treaty creates a mandatory
exception to copyright that allows organisations for the blind
to produce, distribute and make available accessible
formatcopies to visually impaired persons without the
authorisation of the rightholders. TheEUand its Member States
have started work to sign and ratify the Treaty. This may
require the adoption of certain provisions atEUlevel (e.g. to
ensure the possibilityto exchange accessible format copies
across borders).

1.(a)[In particular if you are a person with a disability or an
organisationrepresenting persons with disabilities:]Have you
experienced problems with accessibility to content, including
across borders, arising from Member States'implementation of
this exception?

[In particular if you are an organisation providing services for
persons withdisabilities:]Have you experienced problems when
distributing/communicating works published in specialformats
across theEU?

[In particular if you are a right holder:]Have you experienced
specific problems resulting from the application of limitations
or exceptions allowing for the distribution/ communication of
workspublished in special formats, including across borders?

!YES-Please explain by giving examples

!NO

0NO OPINION

1.If there are problems, what could be done to improve
accessibility?[Open question]

1.What mechanisms exist in the market place to facilitate
accessibility to content? How successful are they?

[Open question]

Text and data mining

Text and data mining/content mining/data analytics51are
different terms used todescribe increasingly important
techniques used in particular by researchers fortheexploration
of vast amounts of existing texts and data (e.g., journals, web
sites, databases etc.). Through the use of software or other
automated processes, an analysisis made of relevant texts and
data in order to obtain new insights, patterns and trends.

The texts and data used for mining are either freely accessible
on the internet or accessible through subscriptions to e.g.
journals and periodicals that give access to the databases of
publishers. A copy is made of the relevant texts and data (e.g.
on browser cache memories or in computers RAM memories or onto
the hard disk of a computer), prior to the actual analysis.
Normally, it is considered that to mine protectedworks or other
subject matter, it is necessary to obtain authorisation from the
right holders for the making of such copies unless such
authorisation can be implied (e.g. content accessible to
general public without restrictions ontheinternet, open
access).

Some argue that the copies required for text and data mining are
covered by the exception for temporary copies in Article5.1of
Directive 2001/29/EC. Others consider that text and data mining
activities should not even be seen as covered by copyright.None
of this is clear, in particular since text and data mining does
not consist only of a single method,butcan be undertaken in
several different ways. Important questions also remain as to
whether the main problems arising in relation to this issue
gobeyond copyright (i.e.

beyond the necessity or not to obtain the authorisation to use
content) and relate rather tothe need to obtain "access" to
content (i.e. being able to use e.g. commercial databases).

A specific Working Group was set up on this issue in the
framework of the "Licences for Europe" stakeholder dialogue. No
consensus was reached among participating stakeholders on either
the problems to be addressed or the results. At the same time,
practical solutions to facilitate text and data miningof
subscription-based scientific

52

content were presented by publishers as an outcome of "Licences
for Europe" . In the context of these discussions, other
stakeholders argued that no additionallicences should be
required to mine material to which access has been provided
through a subscription agreement and considered that a specific
exception for text and data mining should be introduced,
possibly onthebasis of a distinction between commercial
andnonÂ­commercial.

1.(a)[In particular if you are an end user/consumer or an
institutional user:]Have you experienced obstacles, linked to
copyright, when trying to use text or data mining methods,
including across borders?

[In particular if you are a service provider:]Have you
experienced obstacles, linked to copyright, when providing
services based on text or data mining methods, including across
borders?

[In particular if you are a right holder:]Have you
experiencedspecific problems resulting from the use of text and
data mining in relation to copyright protected content,
including across borders?

!YES-Please explain

!NO-Please explain

0NO OPINION

1.If there are problems, how wouldthey best be solved?[Open
question]

1.If your view is that a legislative solution is needed, what
would be its main elements? Which activities should be covered
and under what conditions?

[Open question]

1.If your view is that a differentsolution is needed, what would
it be?[Open question]

1.^re there otherissues, unrelated to copyright, that constitute
barriers to the use of text or data mining methods?

[Open question]

User-generated content

Technological and service developments mean that citizens can
copy, use and distribute content at little to no financial
cost. As a consequence, new types of online activities are
developing rapidly, including the making of so-called
"user-generated content". While users can create totally
original content, they can also take one or several
pre-existing works, change something in the work(s), and upload
the result on the Internet e.g. to53

platforms andblogs.User-generated content (UGC) can thus cover
the modification of

pre-existing works even if the newly-generated/"uploaded" work
does not necessarily require a creative effort and results from
merely adding, subtracting or associating some pre-existing
content with other pre-existing content. This kindof activity
is not "new" as such. However, the development of social
networking and social media sites that enable users to share
content widely has vastly changedthescale of such activities
and increased the potential economic impact for those
holdingrights in the pre-existing works. Re-use is no longer
the preserve of a technically and artistically adept elite.
With the possibilities offered bythenew technologies, re-use is
open to all, at no cost. This in turn raises questions with
regard to fundamental rights such the freedom of expression and
the right to property.

A specific Working Group was set up on this issue in the
framework of the "Licences for Europe" stakeholder dialogue. No
consensus was reached among participating stakeholders on
eithertheproblems to be addressed ortheresults or even the
definition of UGC. Nevertheless, a wide range of views were
presented as to the best way to respond to this phenomenon. One
view wasto say that a new exception is needed to cover UGC, in
particular non-commercial activities by individuals such as
combining existing musical works with videos, sequences of
photos, etc. Another view was that no legislative change is
needed: UGC is flourishing, and licensing schemes are
increasingly available (licence schemes concluded between
rightholders and platforms as well as micro-licences concluded
between rightholders andtheusers generatingthecontent. In any
event, practical solutions to ease user-generated content and
facilitate micro-licensing for small users were pledged by
rightholders across different sectors as a result
ofthe"Licences for

Europe" discussions54.

1.(a)[In particular if you are an end user/consumer:]Have you
experiencedproblems when trying to use pre-existing works or
other subject matter to disseminate new content on the
Internet, including across borders?

[In particular if you are a service provider:]Have you
experienced problems when users publish/disseminate new content
based on the pre-existing works or other subject-matter through
your service, including across borders?

[In particular if you are a right holder:]Have you experienced
problemsresulting from the way the users are using pre-existing
works or other subject-matter to disseminate new content on the
Internet, including across borders?

0YES-Please explain bygiving examples

Using samples in a private remix anduploading it @ soundcloud

!NO

!NO OPINION

1.(a)[In particular if you are an end user/consumer or a right
holder:]Have you experienced problemswhen trying to ensure that
the work you have created (on the basis of pre-existing works)
is properly identified for online use? Are proprietary systems
sufficient in this context?

(b)[In particular if you are a service provider:]Do you provide
possibilities for users that are publishing/disseminating the
works they have created (on the basis of preÂ­existing works)
through your service to properly identify these works for
online use?

!YES-Please explain

!NO-Please explain

!NO OPINION

1.(a)[In particular if you are an end user/consumer or a right
holder):]Have you experienced problems when trying to be
remunerated for the use of the work you have created (on the
basis of pre-existing works)?

(b)[In particular if you are aservice provider:]Do you provide
remuneration schemes for users publishing/disseminating the
works they have created (on the basis of preÂ­existing works)
through your service?

!YES-Please explain

!NO-Please explain

0NO OPINION

1.If there are problems, how would they best be solved?[Open
question]

1.If your view is that a legislative solution is needed, what
would be its main elements? Which activities should be covered
and under what conditions?

[Open question]

1.If your view is that a different solution is needed, what
would it be?[Open question]

I.Private copying and reprography

Directive 2001/29/EC enables Member States to implement in their
national legislation exceptions or limitations to the
reproduction right for copies made for private use and

photocopying55. Levies are charges imposed at national level on
goods typically used for such purposes (blank media, recording
equipment, photocopying machines, mobile listening devices such
as mp3/mp4 players, computers, etc.) with a view to compensating
rightholders for the harm they suffer when copies are made
without their authorisation by certain categories of persons
(i.e. natural persons making copies for their private use) or
through use of certain technique (i.e. reprography). In that
context, levies are important for rightholders.

With the constant developments in digital technology, the
question arises as to whether the copying of files by
consumers/end-users who have purchased content online-e.g. when
a person has bought an MP3 file and goes on to store multiple
copies of that file (in her computer, her tablet and her mobile
phone)-also triggers, or should trigger,the application of
private copying levies. It is argued that, in some cases, these
levies may indeed be claimed by rightholders whether or not the
licence fee paid by the service provider already covers copies
made by the end user. This approach could potentially lead to
instances of double payments whereby levies could be claimed on
top of service

providers' licence fees5657.

There is also an on-going discussion as totheapplication or not
of levies to certain types of cloud-based services such as
personal lockers or personal video recorders.

1.In your view, is therea need to clarify at theEUlevel the
scope and application

58

of the private copying and reprography exceptions in the
digitalenvironment?

0YES-Please explain

0NO-Please explain

!NO OPINION

1.Should digital copies made by end users for private purposes
in the context of a service that has been licensed by
rightholders, and where the harm to the

59

rightholder is minimal, be subject to private copying levies?

!YES-Please explain

!NO-Please explain

!NO OPINION

1.How would changes in levies with respect to the application to
online services (e.g. services based on cloud computing
allowing, for instance, users to havecopies on different
devices) impact the development and functioning of new business
models on the one hand and rightholders'revenue on the other?

[Open question]

1.Would you see an added valuein making levies visible on the
invoices for products subject to levies?60!YES-Please explain

!NO-Please explain

!NO OPINION

Diverging national systems levy different products and apply
different tariffs. This results in obstacles to the free
circulation of goods and services in the Single Market. At the
same time, many Member States continue to allow the
indiscriminate application of private copying levies to all
transactions irrespective of the person to whomtheproduct
subject to a levy issold (e.g. private person or business). In
that context, not all Member States have ex ante exemption
and/or ex post reimbursement schemes which could

remedy these situations and reduce the number of undue
payments61.

1.Have you experienced a situationwhere a cross-border
transaction resulted in undue levy payments, or duplicate
payments of the same levy, or other obstacles tothefree
movement of goods orservices?

!YES-Please specify the type of transaction and indicate the
percentage of the unduepayments. Please also indicate how a
priori exemption and/or ex post reimbursement schemes could
help to remedy the situation.

!NO-Please explain

!NO OPINION

1.What percentage of products subject to a levy is sold to
persons other than natural persons for purposes clearly
unrelated to private copying? Do any of those transactions
result in undue payments? Please explain in detail the example
you provide (type of products, type of transaction,
stakeholders, etc.).

[Open question]

1.Where such undue payments arise, what percentage of trade do
they affect? To what extent could a priori exemptions and/or ex
post reimbursement schemes existing in some Member States help
to remedy the situation?

[Open question]

1.If you have identified specific problems with the current
functioning of the levy system, how would these problems best
be solved?

[Open question]

I.Fair remuneration of authors and performers

TheEUcopyright acquis recognises for authors and performersa
number of exclusive rights and, in the case of performers whose
performances are fixed in phonograms, remuneration rights. There
are few provisions in theEUcopyright law governing the

62

transferof rights from authors or performers to producers or
determining whotheowner of the rights is when the work or other
subject matter is created in the context of an63

employment contract.This is an area that has been traditionally
left for Member States

to regulate and there are significant differences in regulatory
approaches. Substantial differences also exist between
different sectors of the creative industries.

Concerns continue to be raised that authors and performers are
not adequately remunerated,in particularbutnot solely, as
regards online exploitation. Many consider that the economic
benefit of new forms of exploitation is not being fairly shared
along the whole value chain. Another commonly raised issue
concerns contractual practices, negotiation mechanisms,
presumptions of transfer of rights, buy-out clauses andthelack
of possibility to terminate contracts. Some stakeholders are of
the opinion that rules at national level do not suffice to
improve their situation and that action atEUlevelis necessary.

1.[Inparticular if you are an author/performer:] What is the
best mechanism (or combination of mechanisms) to ensure that
you receive an adequate remuneration for the exploitation of
your works and performances?

[Open question]

1.Is therea need to act at theEUlevel (for instance to prohibit
certain clauses in contracts)?

!YES-Please explain

! NO - Please explain why

!NO OPINION

1.If you consider that the current rules are not effective, what
would you suggest

to address the shortcomings you identify?[Open question]

I.Respect for rights

64

Directive 2004/48/EE provides for a harmonised framework for the
civil enforcement of intellectual property rights, including
copyright and related rights. The Commission

has consulted broadly on this text65. Concerns have been raised
as to whether some of its provisions are still fit to ensure a
proper respect for copyright inthedigital age. Ontheone
hand,thecurrent measures seem to be insufficientto deal
withthenew challenges brought by the dissemination of digital
content ontheinternet; ontheother hand, there are concerns
about the current balance between enforcement of copyright
andtheprotection of fundamental rights, in particular the right
for a private life and data protection. While it cannot be
contested that enforcement measures should always be available
in case of infringement of copyright, measures could be
proposed to strengthen

respect for copyright when the infringed content isused for a
commercial purpose66. One

67

means to do this could be to clarify the role of intermediaries
intheIP infrastructure . At thesame time, there could be
clarification of the safeguards for respect of private life and
data protection for private users.

1.Should the civil enforcement system in theEUbe rendered more
efficient forinfringements of copyright committed with a
commercial purpose?

!YES-Please explain

!NO-Please explain

!NO OPINION

1.In particular, is the current legal framework clear enough to
allow for sufficient involvement of intermediaries (such as
Internetservice providers, advertising brokers, payment service
providers, domain name registrars, etc.) in
inhibitingonlinecopyright infringements with a commercial
purpose? If not, what measures would be useful to foster the
cooperation of intermediaries?

[Open question]

1. Doesthecurrent civil enforcement framework ensure
thattheright balance is achieved between the right to have
one's copyright respected and other rights such as the
protection of private life and protection of personal data?

!YES-Please explain

!NO-Please explain

!NO OPINION

I.A singleEUCopyright Title

The idea of establishing a unifiedEUCopyright Title has been
presentin the copyright debate for quite some time now,
although views as to the merits andthefeasibility of such an
objective are divided. A unifiedEUCopyright Title would totally
harmonise the area of copyright law in theEUand replace national
laws. There would then be a singleEUtitle instead of a bundle of
national rights. Some see this as the only manner in which a
truly Single Market for content protected by copyright can be
ensured, while others

believe that the same objective can better be achievedby
establishing a higher level ofharmonisationwhile allowing for a
certain degree of flexibility and specificity in Member States'
legal systems.

1.Should theEUpursue the establishment of a singleEUCopyright
Title, as a means ofestablishing a consistent framework for
rights and exceptions to copyright acrossthe EU,as well as a
single framework for enforcement?

!YES

!NO

!NO OPINION

1.Should this be the next step in the development of copyright
in theEU?Does the current level of difference among the Member
State legislation mean that this is a longer term project?

[Open question]

I.Other issues

The above questionnaire aimsto provide a comprehensive
consultation on the most important matters relating to the
currentEUlegal framework for copyright. Should any important
matters have been omitted, we would appreciate if you could
bring them to our attention, so they can be properly addressed
in the future.

1.^re thereany other important matters related to theEUlegal
framework for copyright? Please explain and indicate how such
matters should be addressed.

[Open question]

