


Public Consultationonthe review oftheEUcopyright rules

Contents

Introduction  2

Context of the consultation  2

How to submit replies to this questionnaire  3

Confidentiality  4

Rights and the functioning of the Single Market  7

Why is it not possible to accessmany online content services
from anywhere in Europe?  7

[The territorial scope of the rights involved in digital
transmissions and the segmentation of

the market through licensing agreements]  7

Is there a need for more clarity as regards the scope ofwhat
needs to be authorised (or not) in

digital transmissions?  10

[The definition of the rights involved in digital transmissions]
10

The act of "making available"  11

Two rights involved in a single act of exploitation  12

Linking and browsing  12

Download to own digital content  13

Registration of works and other subject matter-is it a good
idea?  14

How to improve the use and interoperability of identifiers  15

Term of protection-is it appropriate?  16

Limitations and exceptions in the Single Market  17

Access to content in libraries and archives  20

Preservation and archiving  20

Off-premises access to library collections  21

E-lending  22

Mass digitisation  23

Teaching  25

Research  26

Disabilities  27

Text and data mining  28

User-generated content  30

Private copying and reprography  32

Fair remuneration of authors and performers  35

Respect for rights  36

A singleEUCopyright Title  38

Other issues  38

I.Introduction

A. Context of the consultation

Over the last two decades,digital technology and the Internet
have reshaped the ways in which content is created,
distributed, and accessed. New opportunities have materialised
for those that create and produce content (e.g. a film, a
novel, a song), for new and existing distribution platforms,
for institutions such as libraries, for activities such as
research and for citizens who now expect to be able to access
content-for information, education or entertainment
purposes-regardless of geographical borders.

This new environment also presents challenges. One of them is
for the market to continue to adapt to new forms of
distribution and use. Another one is for the legislator to
ensure that the system of rights, limitations to rights and
enforcement remains appropriate and is adapted to the new
environment. This consultation focuses on the second of these
challenges: ensuring that theEUcopyright regulatory framework
stays fit for purpose in the digital environment to support
creation and innovation, tap the full potential of theSingle
Market, foster growth and investment in our economy and promote
cultural diversity.

In its "Communication on Content in the Digital Single Market"1

COM(2012)789final,18/12/2012.

the Commission set out two parallel tracks of action: on the
onehand, to complete its on-going effort to review and to
modernise theEUcopyright legislative framework23with a view to
a decision in2014on whether to table legislative reform
proposals, and on the other, to facilitate practical industry-
led solutionsthrough the stakeholder dialogue "Licences for
Europe" on issues on which rapid progress was deemed necessary
and possible.

The "Licences for Europe" process has been finalised now2

See the document "Licences for Europe-templedges to bring more
contentonline":http://ec.europa.eu/internal
market/copYright/docs/licences-for-europe/131113 ten-pledges
en.pdf.

. The Commission welcomes thepractical solutions stakeholders
have put forward in this context and will monitor their
progress. Pledges have been made by stakeholders in all four
Working Groups (cross border portability of services,
user-generated content, audiovisual and film heritage and text
and data mining). Taken together, the Commission expects these
pledges to be a further step in making the user environment
easier in many different situations. The Commission also takes
note of the fact that two groups-user-generated contentand text
and data mining-did not reach consensus among participating
stakeholders on either the problems to be addressed or on the
results. The discussions and results of "Licences for Europe"
will be also taken into account in the context of the reviewof
the legislative framework.

As part of the review process, the Commission is now launching a
public consultation on issues identified in the Communication on
Content in the Digital Single Market, i.e.:"territoriality in
the Internal Market,harmonisation,limitations and exceptions to
copyright in the digital age; fragmentation of theEUcopyright
market; and how to improve the effectiveness and efficiency of
enforcement while underpinning its legitimacy in the
widercontext of copyright reform".As highlighted in the
October2013European CouncilConclusions3

EUCO169/13, 24/25October2013.

"Providing digital services and content across the single market
requires the establishment of a copyright regime for the digital
age. The Commissionwill therefore complete its on-going review
of theEUcopyright framework in spring2014.It is important to
modernise Europe's copyright regime and facilitate licensing,
while ensuring a high level protection of intellectual property
rights and taking into accountcultural diversity".

This consultation builds on previous consultations and public
hearings, in particular those on the "Green Paper on copyright
in the knowledge economy"4

COM(2008)466/3,http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/copyright/copyright-infso/index_en.htm#maincontentSec2.

, the "Green Paper on the online distribution of audiovisual
works"5

COM(2011)427final,http://ec.europa.eu/internalmarket/consultations/2011/audiovisual
en.htm.

and "Content Online"6

http://ec.europa.eu/internalmarket/consultations/2009/content
online en.htm.

. These consultations providedvaluable feedback from
stakeholders on a number of questions, on issues as diverse as
the territoriality of copyright and possible ways to overcome
territoriality, exceptions related to the online dissemination
of knowledge, and rightholders' remuneration,particularly in
the audiovisual sector. Views were expressed by stakeholders
representing all stages in the value chain, including right
holders, distributors, consumers, and academics. The questions
elicited widely diverging views on the best way to proceed. The
"Green Paper on Copyright in the Knowledge Economy" was followed
up by a Communication. The replies to the "Green Paper on the
online distribution of audiovisual works" have fed into
subsequent discussions on the Collective Rights Management
Directive and into the current review process.

B. How to submit replies to this questionnaire

You are kindly asked to send your repliesby5February2014in a MS
Word, PDF or OpenDocumentformat to the following e-mail address
of DG Internal Market and
Services:markt-copyright-consultation@ec.europa.eu.Please note
that replies sent after that date will not be taken into
account.

This consultation is addressed to different categories of
stakeholders. To the extent possible, the questions indicate
the category/ies of respondents most likely to be concerned by
them (annotation in brackets, before the actual question).
Respondents should nevertheless feel free to reply to any/all
of the questions. Also, please note that, apart from the
question concerning the identification of the respondent, none
of the questions is obligatory. Replies containing answers only
to part of the questions will be also accepted.

You are requested to provide your answers directly within this
consultation document. For the "Yes/No/No opinion" questions
please put the selected answer inboldandunderlineit so it is
easy for us to see your selection.

Inyour answers to the questions, you are invited to refer to the
situation inEUMemberStates.You are also invited in particular to
indicate, where relevant, what would be the impact of options
you put forward in terms of costs, opportunities and revenues.

The public consultation is available in English. Responses may,
however, be sent in any of the24official languages of theEU.

C.Confidentiality

The contributions receivedin this round of consultation as well
as a summary report presenting the responses in a statistical
and aggregated form will be published on the website ofDG
MARKT.

Please note that all contributions received will be published
together with the identityof the contributor, unless the
contributor objects to the publication of their personal data
on the grounds that such publication would harm his or her
legitimate interests. In this case, the contribution will be
published in anonymous form upon the contributor's explicit
request. Otherwise the contribution will not be published nor
will its content be reflected in the summary report.

Please read ourPrivacy statement.

PLEASE IDENTIFY YOURSELF:

Name:

In the interests of transparency, organisations (including, for
example,NGOs,trade associations and commercial enterprises) are
invited to provide thepublicwith relevant information
aboutthemselves by registering in the Interest Representative
Register and subscribing to its Code of Conduct.

•If you are a Registered organisation, please indicate your
Register ID number below. Your contribution will then be
considered as representing theviews of your organisation.

•If your organisation is not registered, you have the
opportunity toregister now.Responses from organisations not
registered will be published separately.

If you would like to submityour reply on an anonymous basis
please indicate it belowby underlining the following answer:

•Yes, I would like to submit my reply on an anonymous basis

TYPE OF RESPONDENT(Pleaseunderlinethe appropriate):

€End user/consumer(e.g. internet user, reader, subscriber to
music or audiovisualservice, researcher, student)OR
Representative of end users/consumers

->for the purposes of this questionnaire normally referred to in
questions as"end users/consumers"

€Institutional user(e.g. school, university, research centre,
library, archive)OR Representative of institutional users

->for the purposes of this questionnaire normally referred to in
questions as"institutional users"

€Author/Performer OR Representative of authors/performers

€Publisher/Producer/Broadcaster OR Representative of
publishers/producers/ broadcasters

the two above categoriesare, for the purposes of this
questionnaire, normallyreferred to in questions as"right
holders"

€Intermediary/Distributor/Other service provider(e.g. online
music or audiovisualservice, games platform, social media,
search engine, ICT industry)OR Representative of
intermediaries/distributors/other service providers

->for the purposes of this questionnaire normally referred to in
questions as"service providers"

€  Collective Management Organisation

€  Public authority

€  Member State

€  Other(Please explain):

II.Rightsand the functioning of the Single Market

A. Why is it not possible to access many online content services
from anywhere in Europe?

[The territorial scope of therights involved in digital
transmissions and the segmentation of the market through
licensing agreements]

Holders of copyright and related rights-e.g. writers, singers,
musicians-do not enjoy a single protection in theEU.Instead,
they areprotected on the basis of a bundle of national rights
in each Member State. Those rights have been largely harmonised
by the existingEUDirectives. However, differences remain and the
geographical scope of the rights is limited to the territory of
the Member State granting them. Copyright is thus territorial
in the sense that rights are acquired and enforced on a
country-by-country basis under national law7

This principle has been confirmed by the Court of justice on
several occasions.

.

The disseminationof copyright-protected content on the
Internet-e.g. by a music streaming service, or by an online
e-book seller-therefore requires, in principle,an authorisation
for each national territory in which the content is communicated
to the public. Rightholders are, of course, in a position to
grant a multi-territorial or pan-European licence, such that
content services can be provided in several MemberStates and
across borders. A number of steps have been taken atEUlevel to
facilitate multi-territorial licences: the proposal for a
Directive on Collective Rights Management8

Proposal for a Directive of the European Parliament and of the
Council of11July2012on collective management of copyright and
related rights and multi-territorial licensing of rights in
musical works for online uses in the internal market,
COM(2012)372final.

should significantly facilitate the delivery
ofmulti­territoriallicences in musical works for online
services9

Collective Management Organisations play a significant role in
the management of online rights for musical works in contrast
to the situation where online rights are licensed directly by
right holders such as film or record producers or by newspaper
or book publishers.

; the structured stakeholder dialogue "Licences for Europe"10

You can find more information on the following
website:http://ec.europa.eu/licences-for-europe-dialogue/.

and market-led developments such as the on-going work in the
Linked Content Coalition11

You can find more information on the following
website:http://www.linkedcontentcoalition.org/.

.

"Licences for Europe" addressed in particular the specific issue
of cross-border portability, i.e. the ability of consumers
having subscribed to onlineservices in their Member State to
keep accessing them when travelling temporarily to other Member
States. As a result, representatives of the audio-visual sector
issued a joint statement affirming their commitment to continue
working towards the further development of cross-border
portability12

See the document "Licences for Europe-templedges to bring more
content online":http://ec.europa.eu/internal
market/copYright/docs/licences-for-europe/131113 ten-pledges
en.pdf.

.

Despite progress, there are continued problems with the
cross-border provision of, and access to, services. These
problems are most obvious to consumers wanting to access
services that

are made available in MemberStates other than the one in which
they live. Not all online services are available in all Member
States and consumers face problems when trying to access such
services across borders. In some instances, even if the "same"
service is available in all Member States, consumers cannot
access the service across borders (they can only access their
"national" service, and if they try to access the "same"
service in another Member State they are redirected to the one
designated for their country of residence).

This situation may in part stem from the territoriality of
rights and difficulties associated with the clearing of rights
in different territories. Contractual clauses in licensing
agreements between right holders and distributors and/or
between distributorsand end users may also be at the origin of
some of the problems (denial of access, redirection).

The main issue at stake here is, therefore, whether further
measures (legislative ornon­legislative,including market-led
solutions) need to be taken atEUlevel in the medium term13

For possible long term measures such as the establishment of a
European Copyright Code (establishing a single title) see
sectionVIIof this consultation document.

to increase the cross-borderavailability of content services in
the Single Market, while ensuring an adequate level of
protection for right holders.

1.[In particular if you are an end user/consumer:]Have you faced
problems when trying to access online services in anEUMember
State other than the one in which you live?

YES-Please provide examples indicating the Member State, the
sector and the type of content concerned (e.g. premium content
such as certain films and TV series, audio-visual content in
general, music, e-books, magazines, journals and newspapers,
games, applications and other software)

NO

NO OPINION

2.[In particular if you are a service provider:]Have you faced
problems when seeking to provideonlineservices across borders
in the EU?

YES - Please explain whethersuch problems, in your experience,
are related to copyright or to other issues (e.g. business
decisions relating to the cost of providing services across
borders, compliance with other laws such as consumer
protection)? Please provide examples indicatingthe Member
State, the sector and the type of content concerned (e.g.
premium content such as certain films and TV series,
audio-visual content in general, music, e-books, magazines,
journals and newspapers, games, applications and other
software).

NO

NO OPINION

3.[In particular if you are a right holder or a collective
management organisation:]How often are you asked to grant
multi-territorial licences? Please indicate, if possible, the
number of requests per year and provide examples indicating
theMember State, the sector and the type of content concerned.

[Open question]

4.If you have identified problems in the answers to any of the
questions above—what would be the best way to tackle them?

[Open question]

5.[In particular if you are aright holder or a collective
management organisation:]Are there reasons why, even in cases
where you hold allthenecessary rights for alltheterritories in
question, you would still find it necessary or justified to
impose territorial restrictions on aservice provider (in order,
for instance, to ensure that access to certain content is not
possible in certain European countries)?

YES-Please explain by giving examples

NO

NO OPINION

6.[In particular if you are e.g.a broadcaster or a service
provider:]Are there reasons why, even in cases where you have
acquired allthenecessary rights for alltheterritories in
question, you would still find it necessary or justified to
impose territorial restrictions ontheservice recipient (in
order for instance, to redirecttheconsumer to a different
website thantheone he is trying toaccess)?

YES-Please explain by giving examples

NO

NO OPINION

7.Do you think that further measures(legislative or
non-legislative, including market- led solutions) are needed
atEUlevel to increase the cross-border availability of content
services intheSingle Market, while ensuring an adequate level
of protection for right holders?

YES-Please explain

NO - Please explain

NO OPINION

B. Is there a need for more clarity as regards the scope of what
needs to be authorised (or not) in digital transmissions?

[The definition of the rights involved in digital transmissions]

TheEUframework for the protection of copyright and related
rights in the digital environment is largely established by
Directive 2001/29/EC14

Directive 2001/29/EC of the European Parliament and of the
Council of22May2001on theharmonisationof certain aspects of
copyright and related rights in the information society.

on theharmonisationof certain aspects of copyright and related
rights in the information society. OtherEUdirectives in this
field that are relevant in the online environment are those
relating to the protection of software15

Directive 2009/24/EC of the European Parliament and of the
Council of23April2009on the legal protection of computer
programs.

and databases16

Directive 96/9/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council
of11March1996on the legal protection of databases.

.

Directive 2001/29/EC harmonises the rights of authors and
neighbouring rightholders17

Film and record producers,performers and broadcasters are
holders of so-called "neighbouring rights" in, respectively,
their films, records, performances and broadcast. Authors'
content protected by copyright is referred to as a "work" or
"works", while content protected by neighbouring rights is
referred to as "other subject matter".

which are essential for the transmission of digital copies of
works (e.g. an e-book) and other protected subject matter (e.g.
a record in a MP3 format) over the internet or similar digital
networks.

The most relevant rights for digital transmissions are the
reproduction right, i.e. the right to authorise or prohibit the
making of copies18

The right to "authorise or prohibit direct or indirect,
temporary or permanent reproduction by any means and in any
form, in whole or in part" (see Art.2of Directive 2001/29/EC)
although temporary acts of reproduction of a transient or
incidental nature are, under certain conditions, excluded (see
art.5(1)of Directive 2001/29/EC).

, (notably relevant at thestart of the transmission-e.g. the
uploading of a digital copy of a work to a server in view of
making it available-and

at the users' end-e.g. when a user downloads a digital copy of a
work) and the communication to the public/making available
right, i.e. the rights to authorise or prohibit the
dissemination of the works in digital networks19

The right to authorise or prohibit any communication to the
public by wire or wireless means and to authorise or prohibit
the making available to the public "on demand" (see Art.3of
Directive 2001/29/EC).

. These rights are intrinsically linked in digital transmissions
and both need to be cleared.

1.The act of "making available"

Directive 2001/29/EC specifies neitherwhatis covered by the
making available right (e.g. the upload, the accessibility by
the public, the actual reception by the public) norwherethe act
of "making available" takes place. This does not raise questions
if the act is limited to a single territory.Questions arise
however when the transmission covers several territories and
rights need to be cleared (does the act of "making available"
happen in the country of the upload only? in each of the
countries where the content is potentially accessible? in each
of the countries where the content is effectively accessed?).
The most recent case law of the Court of Justice of the
European Union (CJEU) suggests that a relevant criterion is the
"targeting" of a certain Member State's public20

See in particular Case C-173/11 (Football Dataco
vsSportradar)and Case C-5/11(Donner)for copyright and related
rights, and Case C-324/09(L'Oréalvs eBay) for trademarks. With
regard to jurisdiction see also joined Cases C-585/08 and
C-144/09 (Pammer and HotelAlpenhof)and pending
CaseC-441/13(PezHejduk);see however, adopting a different
approach, Case C-170/12 (Pinckney vs KDGMediatech).

. According to this approach the copyright-relevant act (which
has to be licensed) occurs at least in those countries which
are "targeted" by the online service provider. A service
provider "targets" a group of customers residing in a specific
country when it directs its activity to that group, e.g. via
advertisement, promotions, a language or a currency
specifically targeted at thatgroup.

8.Is the scope of the "making available" right in cross-border
situations— i.e.when content is disseminated across
borders—sufficiently clear?

YES

NO-Please explain how this could be clarified and what type of
clarification would be required (e.g. as in "targeting"
approach explained above, as in "country of origin" approach21

The objective of implementinga "country of origin" approach is
to localise the copyright relevant act that must be licenced in
a single Member State (the "country of origin", which could be
for example the Member State in which the content is uploaded
or where the service provider isestablished), regardless of in
how many Member States the work can be accessed or received.
Such an approach has already been introduced atEUlevel with
regard to broadcasting by satellite (see Directive 93/83/EEC on
the coordination of certain rules concerning copyright and
rights related to copyright applicable to satellite
broadcasting and cable retransmission).

)

NO OPINION

9.[In particular if you are a right holder:]Could a
clarification of theterritorial scope of the "making available"
right have an effect on the recognition of your rights (e.g.
whether you are considered to be an author or not, whether you
are considered to

have transferred your rights or not), on your remuneration, or
on the enforcementof rights (including the availability of
injunctive relief4)?

YES-Please explain how such potential effects could be addressed

NO

NO OPINION

2.Two rights involved in a single act of exploitation

Each act of transmission indigital networks entails (in the
current state of technology and law) several reproductions.
This means that there are two rights that apply to digital
transmissions: the reproduction right and the making available
right. This may complicate the licensingof works for online use
notably when the two rights are held by different persons/
entities.

10.[In particular if you a service provider or a right
holder:]Does the application of tworights to a single act of
economic exploitation in the online environment (e.g. a
download) create problems for you?

YES-Please explain what type of measures would be needed in
order to address such problems (e.g. facilitation of joint
licences when therights are in different hands, legislation to
achieve the "bundling of rights")

NO

NO OPINION

3.Linking and browsing

Hyperlinks are references to data that lead a user from one
location in the Internet to another.They are indispensable for
the functioning of the Internet as a network. Several cases are
pending before the CJEU22

Cases C-466/12(Svensson),C-348/13(BestwaterInternational) and
C-279/13 (C More entertainment).

in which the question hasbeen raised whether the provision of a
clickable link constitutes an act of communication to the
public/making available to the public subject to the
authorisation of the rightholder.

A user browsing the internet (e.g. viewing a web-page) regularly
creates temporary copies of works and other subject-matter
protected under copyright on the screen and in the 'cache'
memory of his computer. A question has been referred to the
CJEU23

Case C-360/13 (Public Relations Consultants Association Ltd).
See
alsohttp://www.supremecourt.gov.uk/decided-cases/docs/UKSC2011
0202PressSummarv.pdf.

as to whether suchcopies are always covered by the mandatory
exception for temporary acts of reproductionprovided for in
Article5(1)of Directive 2001/29/EC.

11.Should the provision of a hyperlink leading to a work or
other subject matter protected under copyright, either in
general or under specific circumstances,be subject to the
authorisation of the rightholder?

YES-Please explain whether you consider this to be the case in
general, or under specificcircumstances, and why

NO-Please explain whether you consider this to be the case in
general, or under specific circumstances, and why (e.g. because
it does not amount to an act of communication to the public-or
to a new public, or because it should be covered by a copyright
exception)

NO OPINION

12.Should the viewing of a web-page where this implies the
temporary reproduction of a work or other subject matter
protected under copyright on the screen and in the cache memory
of the user's computer, either in general or under specific
circumstances, be subject to the authorisation of the
rightholder?

YES-Pleaseexplain whether you consider this to be the case in
general, or under specific circumstances, and why

NO-Please explain whether you consider this to be the case in
general, or under specific circumstances, and why (e.g. because
it is or should be coveredby a copyright exception)

NO OPINION

4.Download to own digital content

Digital content is increasingly being bought via digital
transmission (e.g. download to own). Questions arise as to the
possibility for users to disposeof the files they buy in this
manner (e.g. by selling them or by giving them as a gift). The
principle ofEUexhaustion of the distribution right applies in
the case of the distribution of physical copies (e.g. when a
tangible article such as a CD or a book, etc. is sold, the
right holder cannot prevent the further

distributionof that tangible article)24

See also recital28of Directive 2001/29/EC.

. The issue that arises hereis whether this principle can also
be applied in the case of an act of transmission equivalent in
its effect to distribution (i.e. where the buyer acquires the
property of the copy)25

In Case C-128/11 (Oracle vs. UsedSoft) the CJEU ruled that an
author cannot oppose the resale of a second­hand licence that
allows downloading his computer program from his website and
using it for an unlimited period of time. The exclusive right
of distribution of a copy of a computer program covered by such
a licence is exhausted on its first sale. While it is thus
admitted that the distribution right may be subject to
exhaustion in case of computer programs offered for download
with the right holder's consent, the Court was careful to
emphasise that it reached this decisionbased on the Computer
Programs Directive. It was stressed that this exhaustion rule
constitutedalex specialisin relation to the Information Society
Directive (UsedSoft, par.51, 56).

. This raises difficult questions, notably relating to the
practicalapplication of such an approach (how to avoid
re-sellers keeping and using a copy of a work after they have
"re-sold" it-this is often referred to as the "forward and
delete" question) as well as to the economic implications of
the creation of a second-hand market of copies of perfect
quality that never deteriorate (in contrast to the second-hand
market for physical goods).

13.[In particular if you are an end user/consumer:]Have you
faced restrictionswhen trying to resell digital files that you
have purchased (e.g. mp3 file, e-book)?

YES-Please explain by giving examples

NO

NO OPINION

14.[In particular if you are a right holder or a service
provider:] What would be the consequencesof providing a legal
framework enabling the resale of previously purchased digital
content? Please specify per market (type of content) concerned.

[Open question]

C. Registration of works and other subject matter-is it a good
idea?

Registration is not often discussed in copyright in theEUas the
existing international treaties in the area prohibit
formalities as a condition for the protection and exercise of
rights. However, this prohibition is not absolute26

For example, it does not affect "domestic" works-i.e. works
originating in the country imposing the formalities as opposed
to works originating in another country.

. Moreover a system of registration does not need to be made
compulsory or constitute a precondition for the protection and
exercise of rights. With a longer term of protection and with
the increased opportunities that digital technology provides
for the use of content (including older works and works that
otherwise would not

have been disseminated), the advantages and disadvantages of a
system of registration are increasingly being considered27

On the basis of Article3.6of the Directive 2012/28/EU of the
European Parliament and of the Council of25October2012on
certain permitted uses of orphan works, a publicly accessible
online database is currently being set up by the Office
forHarmonisationof the Internal Market(OhIm)for the
registration of orphan works.

.

Would the creation of a registration system atEUlevel help in
the identification and licensing of works and other subject
matter?

YESNO

NO OPINION

What would be the possible advantages of such a system?

[Open question]

17.What would be the possible disadvantages of such a
system?[Open question]

18.What incentives for registration by rightholders could be
envisaged?[Open question]

D. How to improve the use and interoperability of identifiers

There are many private databases of works and other subject
matter held by producers,collective management organisations,
and institutions such as libraries, which are based to a
greater or lesser extent ontheuse of (more or less)
interoperable, internationally agreed 'identifiers'.
Identifiers can be compared to a reference number embedded in a
work, are specific to the sector in which they have been
developed28

E.g. the International Standard Recording Code (ISRC) is used
toidentityrecordings, the International Standard Book Number
(ISBN) is used toidentifγbooks.

, and identify, variously, the work itself, the owner or the
contributor to a work or other subject matter. There are
notable examples of where industry is undertaking actions to
improve the interoperability of such

identifiers and databases. The Global Repertoire Database29

You will find more information about this initiative on the
following website:http://www.globalrepertoiredatabase.com/.

should, once operational, provide a single source of information
on the ownership and control of musical works worldwide. The
Linked Content Coalition30

You will find more information about this initiative (funded in
part by the European Commission) on the following
website:www.linkedcontentcoalition.org.

was established to develop building blocks for the expression
and management of rights and licensing across all content and
media types. It includes the development of a Rights Reference
Model (RRM)-a comprehensive data model for all types of rights
in all types of content. The UK Copyright Hub31

You will find more information about this initiative on the
following website:http://www.copγrighthub.co.uk/.

is seeking to take such identificationsystems a step further,
and to create a linked platform, enabling automated licensing
across different sectors.

19.What should be the role of theEUin promoting the adoption
ofidentifiers in the content sector, and in promoting the
development and interoperability of rights ownership and
permissions databases?

[Open question]

E.Term of protection-is it appropriate?

Works and other subject matter are protected under copyright for
a limited period of time. After the term of protection has
expired, a work falls into the public domain and can be freely
used by anyone (in accordance with the applicable national
rules on moral rights). The Berne Convention32

Berne Convention for the Protection of Literary and Artistic
Works,http://www.wipo.int/treaties/en/ip/berne/.

requires a minimum term of protection of50years after the death
of the author. TheEUrules extend this term of protection
to70years after the death of the author (as do many other
countries, e.g. the US).

With regard to performers in the music sector and phonogram
producers, the term provided for in theEUrules also
extend20years beyond what is mandated in international
agreements, providing for a term of protection of70years after
the first publication. Performers and producers in the
audio-visual sector, however, do not benefit from such an
extended term of protection.

20.Are thecurrent terms of copyright protection still
appropriate in the digital environment?

YES-Please explain

NO - Please explain if they should be longer or shorter

NO OPINION

III.Limitations and exceptions in the Single Market

Limitations and exceptions to copyright and related rights
enable the use of works and other protected subject-matter,
without obtaining authorisation from the rightholders, for
certain purposes and to a certain extent (for instance the use
for illustration purposes of an extract from a novel by a
teacher in a literature class). AtEUlevel they are established
in a number of copyright directives, most notably Directive
2001/29/EC33

Plus Directive 96/9/EC on thelegal protection of databases;
Directive 2009/24/EC on the legal protection of computer
programs, and Directive 92/100/EC on rental right and lending
right.

.

Exceptions and limitations inthenational and EU copyright laws
have to respect international law34

Article9(2)of the Berne Convention for the Protection of
Literary and Artistic Works(1971);Article13of the TRIPS
Agreement (Trade Related Intellectual Property
Rights)1994;Article16(2)of theWIPOPerformers and Phonograms
Treaty(1996);Article9(2)of theWiPoCopyright Treaty(1996).

. In accordance with international obligations, theEUacquis
requires that limitations and exceptions can only be applied in
certain special cases which do not conflict with a normal
exploitation of the work or other subject matter and do not
unreasonably prejudice the legitimate interest of the
rightholders.

Whereas the catalogue of limitations and exceptions included
inEUlaw is exhaustive (no other exceptions can be applied to
the rights harmonised at EU level)35

Other than the grandfathering of the exceptions of minor
importance for analogue uses existing in Member States at the
time of adoption of Directive 2001/29/EC (see, Art. 5(3)(o)).

, these limitations and exceptions are often optional36

With the exception of certain limitations: (i) in the Computer
Programs Directive, (ii) in the Database
Directive,(iii)Article5(1)in the Directive 2001/29/EC
and(iv)the Orphan Works Directive.

, in the sense that Member States are free to reflect innational
legislation as many or as few of them as they wish. Moreover,
the formulation of certain of the limitations and exceptions is
general enough to give significant flexibility to the Member
States as to how, and to what extent, to implement them (ifthey
decide to do so). Finally, it is worth noting that not all of
the limitations and exceptions included in theEUlegal framework
for copyright are of equivalent significance in policy terms and
in terms of their potential effect on the functioning of the
Single Market.

In addition, in the same manner that the definition of the
rights is territorial (i.e. has an effect only within the
territory of the Member State), the definition of the
limitations and exceptions to the rights is territorial too (so
anact that is covered by an exception in a Member State "A" may
still require the authorisation of the rightholder once we move
to the Member State "B")37

Only the exception established in the recent Orphan Works
Directive (a mandatory exception to copyrightand related rights
in the case where the rightholders are not known or cannot be
located) has been given across­bordereffect, which means that,
for instance, once a literary work-for instance a novel-is
considered an orphan work in a Member State, that same novel
shall be considered an orphan work in all Member States and can
be used and accessed in all Member States.

.

The cross-border effect of limitations and exceptions also
raises the question of fair compensation of rightholders. In
some instances, Member States are obliged to compensate
rightholders for the harm inflicted on them by a limitation or
exception to their rights. In other instances Member States are
not obliged, but may decide, to provide for such compensation.
If a limitation or exception triggering a mechanism of fair
compensation were to be given cross-border effect (e.g. the
books are used for illustration in an online course given by an
university in a Member State "A" and the students are in a
Member State "B") then there wouldalso be a need to clarify
which national law should determine the level of that
compensation and who should pay it.

Finally, the question of flexibility and adaptability is being
raised: what is the best mechanism to ensure that theEUand
Member States'regulatory frameworks adapt when necessary
(either to clarify that certain uses are covered by an
exception or to confirm that for certain uses the authorisation
of rightholders is required)? The main question here is whether
a greater degree of flexibility can be introduced in theEUand
Member States regulatory framework while ensuring the required
legal certainty, including for the functioning of the Single
Market, and respecting theEU'sinternational obligations.

21.Are there problems arising fromthe fact that most limitations
and exceptions provided in theEUcopyright directives are
optional for the Member States?

YES-Please explain by referring to specific cases

NO-Please explain

NO OPINION

22.Shouldsome/all of the exceptions bemade mandatory and, if so,
is there a need for a higher level ofharmonisationof such
exceptions?

YES-Please explain by referring to specific cases

NO-Please explain

NO OPINION

23.Should any new limitations andexceptions be added to or
removed from the existing catalogue? Please explain by
referring to specific cases.

[Open question]

24.Independently from the questions above, is there a need to
provide for a greater degree of flexibility in theEUregulatory
framework for limitations and exceptions?

YES-Please explain why

NO-Please explain why

NO OPINION

25.If yes, what would be the best approach to provide for
flexibility? (e.g. interpretation by national courts and the
ECJ, periodic revisionsof the directives, interpretations by
the Commission, built-in flexibility, e.g. in the form of a
fair-use or fair dealing provision/open norm, etc.)? Please
explain indicating what would be the relative advantages and
disadvantages of such an approachas well as its possible
effects on the functioning of the Internal Market.

[Open question]

26.Does the territoriality of limitations and exceptions, in
your experience, constitute a problem?

YES-Please explain why and specify which exceptions you are
referring to

NO-Please explain why and specify which exceptions you are
referring to

NO OPINION

27.In the event that limitations and exceptions established at
national level were to have cross-border effect, how should the
question of "fair compensation"be

addressed, when such compensation is part of the exception?
(e.g. who pays whom, where?)

[Open question]

A.Access to content in libraries and archives

Directive 2001/29/EC enables Member States to reflect in their
national law a range of limitations and exceptions for the
benefit of publicly accessible libraries, educational
establishments and museums, as well as archives. If
implemented, these exceptions allow acts of preservation and
archiving38

Article 5(2)c of Directive2001/29.

and enable on-site consultation of the works and other subject
matter in the collections of such institutions39

Article 5(3)n of Directive2001/29.

. The public lending (underan exception or limitation) by these
establishments of physical copies of works and other subject
matter is governed by the Rental and Lending Directive40

Article5of Directive 2006/115/EC.

.

Questions arise as to whether the current framework continuesto
achieve the objectives envisaged or whether it needs to be
clarified or updated to cover use in digital networks. At the
same time, questions arise as to the effect of such a possible
expansion on the normal exploitation of works and other subject
matter and as to the prejudice this may cause to rightholders.
The role of licensing and possible framework agreements between
different stakeholders also needs to be considered here.

1.Preservation and archiving

The preservation of the copies of works or other subject-matter
held in the collections of cultural establishments (e.g. books,
records, or films)-the restoration or replacement of works, the
copying of fragile works-may involve the creation of
anothercopy/ies of these works or other subject matter. Most
Member States provide for an exception in their national laws
allowing for the making of such preservation copies. The scope
of the exception differs from Member State to Member State (as
regards the type of beneficiary establishments, the types of
works/subject-matter covered by the exception, the mode of
copying and the number of reproductions that a beneficiary
establishment may make). Also, the current legal status of new
types of preservation activities (e.g. harvesting and archiving
publicly available web content) is often uncertain.

28.(a)[In particular if you are an institutional user:]Have you
experienced specific problems when trying to use an exception
to preserve and archive specific worksor other subject matter
in your collection?

(b)[In particular if you are a right holder:]Have you
experienced problems with the use by libraries, educational
establishments, museum or archives of the preservation
exception?

YES-Please explain, by Member State, sector, and the type of use
in question.

NO

NO OPINION

29.If there are problems, how would they best be solved?[Open
question]

30.If your view is that a legislativesolution is needed, what
would be its main elements? Which activities of the beneficiary
institutions should be covered and under which conditions?

[Open question]

31.If your view is that a different solution is needed, what
would it be?[Open question]

2.Off-premises access to library collections

Directive 2001/29/EC provides an exception for the consultation
of works and other subject- matter (consulting an e-book,
watching a documentary) via dedicated terminals on the premises
of such establishments for the purpose of research and private
study. The online consultation of works and other
subject-matter remotely (i.e. when the library user is not on
the premises of the library) requires authorisation and is
generally addressed in agreements between
universities/libraries and publishers. Some argue that the law
rather than agreements should provide for the possibility to,
and the conditions for, granting online access to collections.

32.(a)[In particular if you arean institutional user:]Have you
experienced specific problems when trying to negotiate
agreements with rights holders that enable you to provide
remote access, including across borders, to your collections
(or parts thereof) for purposes of research andprivate study?

(b)[In particular if you are an end user/consumer:]Have you
experienced specific problems when trying to consult, including
across borders, works and other subject-matter held in

thecollections of institutions such as universities and national
libraries when you are not on the premises of the institutions
in question?

(c)[In particular if you are a right holder:]Have you negotiated
agreements with institutional users that enable those
institutions to provide remote access, including across
borders, to the works or other subject-matter in their
collections, for purposes of research and private study?

[Open question]

33.If there are problems, how would they best be solved?[Open
question]

34.If yourview isthat a legislative solutionis needed, what
would be its main elements? Which activities of the beneficiary
institutions should be covered and under which conditions?

[Open question]

35.If yourview isthat a different solution is needed, what would
it be?

[Open question]

3.E-lending

Traditionally, public libraries have loaned physical copies of
works (i.e. books, sometimes also CDs and DVDs) to their users.
Recent technological developments have made it technically
possible for libraries to provide users with temporary accessto
digital content, such as e-books, music or films via networks.
Under the current legal framework, libraries need to obtain the
authorisation of the rights holders to organise such e-lending
activities. In various Member States, publishers and
librariesare currently experimenting with different business
models for the making available of works online, including
direct supply of e-books to libraries by publishers or bundling
by aggregators.

36.(a)[In particular if you are a library:]Have you experienced
specific problems when trying to negotiate agreements to enable
the electronic lending (e-lending), including across borders, of
books or other materials held in your collection?

[In particular if you are an end user/consumer:]Have you
experienced specific problems when trying to borrow books or
other materials electronically (e-lending), including across
borders, from institutions such as public libraries?

[In particular if you are a right holder:]Have you negotiated
agreements with libraries to enable them to lend books or other
materials electronically, including across borders?

YES-Please explain with specific examples

NO

NO OPINION

37.If there are problems, how would they best be solved?[Open
question]

The following two questions are relevant both to this point
(n°3)and the previous one (n°2).

38.[In particular if you are an institutional user:]What
differences do you see in the management of physical and online
collections, including providing access to your subscribers?
What problems have you encountered?

[Open question]

39.[In particular if you are a right holder:]What difference do
you see between libraries' traditional activities such as
on-premises consultation or public lending and activities such
as off-premises(online,at adistance)consultation
ande­lending?What problems have you encountered?

[Open question]

4.Mass digitisation

The term "mass digitisation"is normally used to refer to efforts
by institutions such as libraries and archives to digitise (e.g.
scan) the entire content or part of their collections with an
objective to preserve these collections and, normally, to make
them available to the public. Examples are efforts by libraries
to digitise novels form the early part of the 20thcentury or
whole collections of pictures of historical value. This matter
has been partly addressed at the

EUlevel by the2011Memorandum of Understanding(MoU) on key
principles on the digitisation and making available of out of
commerce works (i.e. works which are no longer found in the
normal channels of commerce), which is aiming to facilitate
mass digitisation efforts (for books and learned journals) on
the basis of licence agreements between libraries and similar
cultural institutions on the one hand and the collecting
societies representing authors and publishers on the other41

You will find more information about his MoU on the following
website:http://ec.europa.eu/internalmarket/
copyright/out-of-commerce/index en.htm.

. Provided the required fundingis ensured (digitisation projects
are extremely expensive), the result of this MoU should be that
books that are currently to be found only in the archives of,
for instance, libraries will be digitised and made available
online to everyone. The MoU is based on voluntary licences
(granted by Collective Management Organisations on the basis of
the mandates they receive from authors and publishers). Some
Member States may need to enact legislation to ensure the
largest possible effect of such licences (e.g. by establishing
in legislation a presumption of representation of a collecting
society or the recognition of an "extended effect" to the
licences granted)42

France and Germany have already adopted legislation to back the
effects of the MoU. The French
act(LOIn°2012-287du1ermars2012relativeà l'exploitation
numérique des livres indisponibles du xxe
siècle)foreseescollective management,unless the author or
publisher in question opposes such management. The German
act(Gesetz zur Nutzung verwaister und vergriffener Werke und
einer weiteren Änderung des Urheberrechtsgesetzes
vom1.Oktober2013)containsalegalpresumption of representation by
a collecting society in relation to works whose rightholders are
not members of the collecting society.

.

40.[In particular if you are an institutional user, engaging or
wanting to engage in massdigitisation projects, a right holder,
a collective management organisation:]Would it be necessary in
yourcountry to enact legislation to ensure that the results of
the2011MoU(i.e.the agreements concluded between libraries and
collecting societies) have a cross-border effect so that out of
commerce works can be accessed across theEU?

YES-Please explainwhy and how it could best be achieved

NO-Please explain

NO OPINION

41.Would it be necessary to develop mechanisms, beyond those
already agreed for other types of content (e.g. for audio- or
audio-visual collections, broadcasters' archives)?

YES-Please explain

NO-Please explain

NO OPINION

B.Teaching

Directive 2001/29/EC43

Article 5(3)a of Directive2001/29.

enables Member States to implementin their national legislation
limitations and exceptions for the purpose of illustration for
non-commercial teaching. Such exceptions would typically allow
a teacher to use parts of or full works to illustrate his
course, e.g. by distributing copies of fragments of a book or
of newspaper articles in the classroom or by showing protected
content on a smart board without having to obtain authorisation
from the right holders. The open formulation of this (optional)
provision allows for rather different implementation at Member
States level. The implementation of the exception differs from
Member State to Member State, with several Member States
providing instead a framework for the licensing of content for
certain educational uses. Some argue that the law should
provide for better possibilities for distance learning and
study at home.

42.(a)[In particular if you are an end user/consumer or an
institutional user:]Have you experienced specificproblems when
trying to use works or other subject-matter for illustration
for teaching, including across borders?

(b)[In particular if you are a right holder:]Have you
experienced specific problems resulting from the way in which
works or other subject-matter are used for illustration for
teaching, including across borders?

YES-Please explain

NO

NO OPINION

43.If there are problems, how would they best be solved?[Open
question]

44.What mechanisms exist in themarket place to facilitate the
use of content for illustration for teaching purposes? How
successful are they?

[Open question]

45.If your view is that a legislativesolution is needed, what
would be its main elements? Which activities of the beneficiary
institutions should be covered and under what conditions?

[Open question]

46.If your view is that a different solution is needed, what
would it be?

[Open question]

C. Research

Directive 2001/29/EC44

Article 5(3)a of Directive2001/29.

enables Member States to choose whether to implement in their
national laws a limitation for the purpose of non-commercial
scientific research. The openformulation of this (optional)
provision allows for rather different implementations at Member
States level.

47.(a)[In particular if you are an end user/consumer or an
institutional user:]Have you experienced specific problems when
trying to use worksor other subject matter in the context of
research projects/activities, including across borders?

(b)[In particular if you are a right holder:]Have you
experienced specific problems resulting from the way in which
works or other subject-matter are used in the context of
research projects/activities, including across borders?

YES-Please explain

NO

NO OPINION

48.If there are problems, how would they best be solved?[Open
question]

[-- Image: Picture 1 --]

D.Disabilities

Directive 2001/29/EC45

Article5(3)b of Directive2001/29.

provides for an exception/limitationfor the benefit of people
with a disability. The open formulation of this (optional)
provision allows for rather different implementations at Member
States level. AtEUand international level projects have been
launched to increase the accessibility of works and other
subject-matter for persons with disabilities (notably by
increasing the number of works published in special formats and
facilitating their distribution across the European Union)46

The European Trusted Intermediaries Network (ETIN) resulting
from a Memorandum of Understanding between representatives of
the right-holder community (publishers, authors, collecting
societies) and interestedparties such as associations for blind
and dyslexic
persons(httpy/ec.europa.eu/interna^market/copyright/initiatives/access/index_en.htm)and
the Trusted Intermediary Global Accessible
Resources(TIGAR)project
inWIPO(http://www.visionip.org/portal/en/).

.

The Marrakesh Treaty47

Marrakesh Treaty to Facilitate Access to Published Works by
Visually Impaired Persons and Persons with Print Disabilities,
Marrakesh, June17to28 2013.

has been adopted to facilitate access to published works for
persons who are blind, visually impaired, or otherwise print
disabled. The Treaty creates a mandatory exception to copyright
that allows organisations for the blind to produce, distribute
and make available accessible format copies to visually
impaired persons without the authorisation of the rightholders.
TheEUand its Member States have started work to sign and ratify
the Treaty. This may require the adoption of certain provisions
atEUlevel (e.g. to ensure the possibility to exchange accessible
format copies across borders).

50.(a)[In particular if you are a person with a disability or an
organisation representingpersons with disabilities:]Have you
experienced problems with accessibility to content, including
across borders, arising from Member States' implementation of
this exception?

[In particular if you are an organisation providing services for
persons with disabilities:]Have you experienced problems when
distributing/communicating works published in special formats
across theEU?

[In particular if you are a right holder:]Have you experienced
specific problems resulting fromtheapplication of limitations
or exceptions allowing forthedistribution/ communication of
works published in special formats, including across borders?

YES-Please explain by giving examples

NO

NO OPINION

51.If there are problems, what could be done to improve
accessibility?[Open question]

52.What mechanisms exist in the market place to facilitate
accessibility to content? How successful are they?

[Open question]

E. Text and data mining

Text and data mining/content mining/data analytics48

For the purpose of the present document, the term "text and data
mining" will be used.

are different terms used to describe increasingly important
techniques used in particular by researchers for the
exploration of vast amounts of existing texts and data (e.g.,
journals, web sites, databases etc.). Through the use of
software or other automated processes, an analysis is made of
relevant texts and data in order to obtainnew insights,
patterns and trends.

The texts and data used for mining are either freely accessible
on the internet or accessible through subscriptions to e.g.
journals and periodicals that give access to the databases of
publishers. A copy is made of the relevant texts and data (e.g.
on browser cache memories or in computers RAM memories or onto
the hard disk of a computer), prior to the actual analysis.
Normally, it is considered that to mine protected works or
other subject matter, it is necessary to obtain authorisation
from the right holders for the making of such copies unless
such authorisation can be implied (e.g. content accessible to
general public without restrictions on the internet, open
access).

Some argue that the copies required for text and data mining are
covered bytheexception for temporary copies in Article5.1of
Directive 2001/29/EC. Others consider that text and data mining
activities should not even be seen as covered by copyright. None
of this is clear, inparticular since text and data mining does
not consist only of a single method, but can be undertaken in
several different ways. Important questions also remain as to
whether the main problems arising in relation to this issue go
beyond copyright (i.e. beyond the necessity or not

to obtain the authorisation to use content) and relate rather to
the need to obtain "access" to content (i.e. being able to use
e.g. commercial databases).

A specific Working Group was set up on this issue in the
framework of the"Licences for Europe" stakeholder dialogue. No
consensus was reached among participating stakeholders on
either the problems to be addressed or the results. At the same
time, practical solutions to facilitate text and data mining of
subscription-based scientific content were presented by
publishers as an outcome of "Licences for Europe"49

See the document "Licences for Europe-ten pledges to bring more
content online":http://ec.europa.eu/internal
market/copyright/docs/licences-for-europe/131113 ten-pledges
en.pdf.

. In the context of these discussions, other stakeholders argued
that no additional licences should be required to mine material
to which access has been providedthrough a subscription
agreement and considered that a specific exception for text and
data mining should be introduced, possibly on the basis of a
distinction between commercial and non-commercial.

53.(a)[In particular if you are an end user/consumer or an
institutional user:]Have you experienced obstacles, linked to
copyright, when trying to use text or data mining methods,
including across borders?

[In particular if you are a service provider:]Have you
experienced obstacles, linked to copyright, when
providingservicesbased on text or data mining methods,
including across borders?

[In particular if you are a right holder:]Have you experienced
specific problems resulting fromtheuse of text and data mining
inrelation to copyright protected content, including across
borders?

YES-Please explain

NO-Please explain

NO OPINION

54.If there are problems, how would they best be solved?[Open
question]

55. If your view is that a legislativesolution is needed, what
would be its main elements? Which activities should be covered
and under what conditions?

[Open question]

56.If yourview isthat a different solution is needed, what would
it be?

[Open question]

57.Are there other issues, unrelated to copyright, that
constitute barriers to the use of text or data mining methods?

[Open question]

F. User-generated content

Technological and service developmentsmean that citizens can
copy, use and distribute content at little to no financial
cost. As a consequence, new types of online activities are
developing rapidly, including the making of so-called
"user-generated content". While users can create totally
original content, they can also take one or several
pre-existing works, change something in the work(s), and upload
the result on the Internet e.g. to platforms andblogs50

A typical example could be the "kitchen" or "wedding" video
(adding one's own video toa pre-existing sound recording), or
adding one's own text to a pre-existing photograph. Other
examples are "mash-ups" (blending two sound recordings), and
reproducing parts of journalistic work (report, review etc.) in
a blog.

.User-generated content (UGC) can thus cover the modification of
pre-existing works even if the newly-generated/"uploaded" work
does not necessarily require a creative effort and results from
merely adding, subtracting or associating some pre-existing
content with other pre-existingcontent. This kind of activity
is not "new" as such. However, the development of social
networking and social media sites that enable users to share
content widely has vastly changed the scale of such activities
and increasedthepotential economic impactfor those holding
rights in the pre-existing works. Re-use is no longer the
preserve of a technically and artistically adept elite. With
the possibilities offered by the new technologies, re-use is
open to all, at no cost. This in turn raises questions with
regard to fundamental rights such the freedom of expression and
the right to property.

A specific Working Group was set up on this issue in the
framework of the "Licences for Europe" stakeholder dialogue. No
consensus was reached among participating stakeholders on either
the problems to be addressed or the results or even the
definition of UGC. Nevertheless, a wide range of views were
presented as to the best way to respond to this phenomenon. One
view was to say that a new exception is needed to coverUGC, in
particular non-commercial activities by individuals such as
combining existing musical works with videos, sequences of
photos, etc. Another view was that no legislative change is
needed: UGC is flourishing, and licensing schemes are
increasingly available (licence schemes concluded

between rightholders and platforms as well as micro-licences
concluded between rightholders and the users generating the
content. In any event, practical solutions to ease
user-generated content and facilitate micro-licensing for small
users were pledged by rightholders across different sectors as a
result of the "Licences for Europe" discussions51

See the document "Licences for Europe-ten pledges to bring more
content
online":http://ec.europa.eu/internalmarket/copγright/docs/licences-for-europe/131113ten-pledges
en.pdf.

.

58.(a)[In particular if you are an end user/consumer:]Have you
experienced problems when trying to use pre-existing works or
other subject matter todisseminate new content on the Internet,
including across borders?

[In particular if you are a service provider:]Have you
experienced problems when users publish/disseminate new content
based on the pre-existing works or other subject-matter
throughyour service, including across borders?

[In particular if you are a right holder:]Have you experienced
problems resulting from the way the users are using
pre-existing works or other subject-matter to disseminate new
content on theInternet, including across borders?

YES-Please explain by giving examples

NO

NO OPINION

59.(a)[In particular if you are an end user/consumer or a right
holder:]Have you experienced problemswhen trying to ensure that
the work you have created (onthebasis of pre-existing works) is
properly identified for online use? Are proprietary systems
sufficient in this context?

(b)[In particular if you are a service provider:]Do you provide
possibilities for users that are publishing/disseminating the
works they have created (on the basis of pre-existing works)
through your service to properly identify these works for
online use?

YES-Please explain

NO - Please explain

NO OPINION

60.(a)[In particular if you are an end user/consumer or a right
holder):]Have you experienced problems when trying to be
remunerated fortheuse ofthework you have created (on the basis
of pre-existing works)?

(b)[In particular if you are a service provider:]Do you provide
remuneration schemes for users publishing/disseminating the
works they have created (on the basis of pre-existing works)
through yourservice?

YES-Please explain

NO - Please explain

NO OPINION

61.If there are problems, how wouldthey best be solved?[Open
question]

62.If your view is that a legislative solution is needed, what
would be its main elements? Which activities should be covered
and under what conditions?

[Open question]

63.If your view is that a differentsolution is needed, what
would it be?

[Open question]

IV.Private copying and reprography

Directive 2001/29/EC enables Member States to implement in their
national legislation exceptions or limitations to the
reproduction right for copies made for private use and

photocopying52

Article5.2)(a) and (b) of Directive2001/29.

. Levies are charges imposed at national level on goods
typically used for such purposes (blank media, recording
equipment, photocopying machines, mobilelistening devices such
as mp3/mp4 players, computers, etc.) with a view to
compensating rightholders for the harm they suffer when copies
are made without their authorisation by certain categories of
persons (i.e. natural persons making copies for their private
use) or through use of certain technique (i.e. reprography). In
that context, levies are important for rightholders.

With the constant developments in digital technology, the
question arises as to whether the copying of files by
consumers/end-userswho have purchased content online-e.g. when
a person has bought an MP3 file and goes on to store multiple
copies of that file (in her computer, her tablet and her mobile
phone)-also triggers, or should trigger, the application of
private copying levies. It is argued that, in some cases, these
levies may indeed be claimed by rightholders whether or not the
licence fee paid by the service provider already covers copies
made by the end user. This approach could potentially lead to
instances of double payments whereby levies could be claimed on
top of service providers' licence fees5657.

There is also an on-going discussion as to the application or
not of levies to certain types of cloud-basedservicessuch as
personal lockers or personalvideorecorders.

64.In your view, is therea need to clarify at theEUlevel the
scope and application of the private copying and reprography
exceptions53

Art. 5.2(a) and 5.2(b) of Directive 2001/29/EC.

in the digital environment?

YES-Please explain

NO-Please explain

NO OPINION

65.Should digital copies made by end users for private purposes
in the context of a service that has been licensed by
rightholders, and wheretheharm totherightholder is minimal, be
subject to private copying levies?54

This issue was alsoaddressed in the recommendations of Mr
AntonioVitorinoresulting from the mediation on private copying
and reprography levies

YES-Please explain

NO-Please explain

NO OPINION

66.How would changes in levies withrespect to the application to
online services (e.g. services based on cloud computing
allowing, for instance, users to have copies on different
devices) impact the development and functioning of new business
models on the one hand andrightholders'revenueon the other?

[Open question]

67.Would you see an added value in making levies visible on the
invoices for products subject to levies?55

This issue was also addressed in the recommendations of Mr
AntonioVitorinoresulting from the mediationon private copying
and reprography levies.

YES-Please explain

NO - Please explain

NO OPINION

Diverging national systems levy different products and apply
different tariffs. This results in obstacles to the free
circulation of goods and servicesin the Single Market. At the
same time, many Member States continue to allow the
indiscriminate application of private copying levies to all
transactions irrespective of the person to whom the product
subject to a levy is sold (e.g. private person or business). In
that context, not all Member States have ex ante exemption
and/or ex post reimbursement schemes which could remedy these
situations and reduce the number of undue payments56

This issue was also addressed in the recommendations of Mr
AntonioVitorinoresulting from the mediation on private copying
and reprography levies.

.

68.Have you experienced a situation where a cross-border
transaction resulted in undue levy payments, or duplicate
payments of the same levy, or other obstacles tothefree
movement of goods orservices?

YES-Please specify the type of transaction and indicate the
percentage of the undue payments. Please also indicate how a
priori exemption and/or ex post reimbursement schemes could
help to remedy the situation.

NO-Please explain

NO OPINION

69.What percentage of products subject to a levy is sold to
persons other than natural persons for purposes clearly
unrelated to private copying? Do any of those transactions
result in undue payments? Please explain in detail theexample
you provide (type of products, type of transaction,
stakeholders, etc.).

[Open question]

70.Where such undue payments arise, what percentage of trade do
they affect? To what extent could a priori exemptions and/or ex
post reimbursement schemes existing in some Member States help
to remedy the situation?

[Open question]

71.If you have identified specific problems with the current
functioning of the levy system, how would these problems best
be solved?

[Open question]

V.Fair remuneration of authors and performers

TheEUcopyright acquis recognises for authors and performers a
number of exclusive rights and, in the case of performers whose
performances are fixed in phonograms, remuneration rights. There
are few provisions in theEUcopyright law governing thetransferof
rights from authors or performers to producers57

See e.g. Directive 92/100/EEC, Art.2(4)-(7).

or determining who the owner of the rights is when the

work or other subject matter is created in the context of an
employment contract58

See e.g. Art.2.3.of Directive 2009/24/EC, Art.4of Directive
96/9/EC.

. This is an area that has been traditionally left for Member
States to regulate and there are significant differences in
regulatory approaches. Substantial differences also exist
between different sectors of the creative industries.

Concerns continue to be raised that authors and performers are
not adequately remunerated, in particular but not solely, as
regards online exploitation. Many consider that the economic
benefit of new forms of exploitation is not being fairly shared
along the whole value chain. Another commonly raised issue
concerns contractual practices, negotiation mechanisms,
presumptions of transfer of rights, buy-out clauses and the
lack of possibility to terminate contracts. Some stakeholders
are of the opinion that rules at national level do not suffice
to improve their situation and that action atEUlevel is
necessary.

72.[In particular if you are an author/performer:] What is the
best mechanism (or combination of mechanisms) to ensure that
you receive an adequate remuneration for the exploitation of
your works and performances?

[Open question]

73.Is there a need to act at theEUlevel (for instance to
prohibit certain clauses in contracts)?

YES-Please explain

NO - Please explain why

NO OPINION

74.If you consider that the current rules are not effective,
what would you suggest to address the shortcomings you
identify?

[Open question]

VI.Respect for rights

Directive 2004/48/EE59

Directive 2004/48/EC of the European Parliament and of the
Council of29April2004on the enforcement of intellectual
property rights.

providesforaharmonised framework for thecivil enforcement of
intellectual property rights, including copyright and related
rights. The Commission has consulted broadly on this text60

You will find more information on the following
website:http://ec.europa.eu/internalmarket/iprenforcement/
directive/index en.htm

. Concerns have been raised as to whether some of its provisions
are still fit to ensure a proper respect for copyright in the
digital age. On the one hand, the current measures seem to be
insufficient to deal with the new challenges brought by the
dissemination of digital content on the internet; on the other
hand, there are concerns about the current balance between
enforcement of copyright and the protection of fundamental
rights, in particular the right for a private life and data
protection. While it cannot be contested that enforcement
measures should always be available in case of infringement of
copyright, measures could be proposed to strengthen respect for
copyright when the infringedcontent is used for a commercial
purpose61

For example when the infringing content is offered on a website
which gets advertising revenues that depend on the volume of
traffic.

. One means to do this could be to clarify the role of
intermediaries in the IP infrastructure62

This clarification should not affect the liability regime of
intermediary service providers established by Directive
2000/31/EC on electronic commerce, which will remain unchanged.

. At the same time, there could be clarification of
thesafeguards for respect of private life and data protection
for private users.

75.Should the civil enforcement system in theEUbe rendered more
efficient for infringements of copyright committed with a
commercial purpose?

YES-Please explain

NO - Please explain

NO OPINION

76.In particular, is the current legal framework clear enough to
allow for sufficient involvement of intermediaries (such
asInternetservice providers, advertisingbrokers, payment
service providers, domain name registrars, etc.) in inhibiting
online copyright infringements with a commercial purpose? If
not, what measures would be useful to foster the cooperation of
intermediaries?

[Open question]

77.Does the current civil enforcement framework ensure that the
right balance is achieved between the right to have one's
copyright respected and other rights such as the protection of
private life and protection of personal data?

YES-Please explain

NO - Please explain

NO OPINION

VII.A singleEUCopyright Title

The idea of establishing a unifiedEUCopyright Title has been
present in the copyright debate for quite some time now,
although views as to the merits and the feasibility of such an
objectiveare divided. A unifiedEUCopyright Title would totally
harmonise the area of copyright law in theEUand replace
national laws. There would then be a singleEUtitle instead of a
bundle of national rights. Some see this as the only manner in
which a truly Single Market for content protected by copyright
can be ensured, while others believe that the same objective
can better be achieved by establishing a higher level
ofharmonisationwhile allowing for a certaindegree of
flexibility and specificity in Member States' legal systems.

Should theEUpursue theestablishment of a singleEUCopyright
Title, as a means of establishing a consistent framework for
rights and exceptions to copyright acrossthe EU,as well as a
single framework for enforcement?

YES

NO

NO OPINION

Should this be the next step in the development of copyright in
theEU?Does the current level of difference among the Member
State legislation mean that this is a longerterm project?

[Open question]

VIII.Other issues

The above questionnaire aims to provide a comprehensive
consultation on the most important matters relating to the
currentEUlegal framework for copyright. Should any important

mattershave been omitted, we would appreciate if you could bring
them to our attention, so they can be properly addressed in the
future.

80.Are there any other important matters related to theEUlegal
framework for copyright? Please explain and indicate how such
matters should be addressed.

[Open question]

2  As announced in the Intellectual Property Strategy'A single
market for Intellectual Property Rights: COM

287  final,24/05/2011.

3  "Based on market studies andimpact assessment and legal
drafting work"as announced in the Communication

789.

24  Injunctive relief is a temporary or permanent remedy
allowing the right holder to stop or prevent an infringement of
his/her right.

56  Communication "Unleashing the Potential of Cloud Computing
in Europe", COM(2012)529final.

57  These issues were addressed in the recommendations of
MrAntónio Vitorinoresulting from the mediation onprivate
copying and reprography levies. You can consultthese
recommendations on the following
website:http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/copyright/docs/levy_reform/130131_levies-vitorino-recommendations_en.pdf.

